Agreement
between the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and
Austrian Federal Government on Economic, Agricultural, Environmental, Industrial, Technical and Technological Cooperation
The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Austrian Federal Government (hereinafter referred to as the Parties),
Guided by the Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation between the Republic of Kazakhstan, of the one part, and the European Communities and their Member States, on the other hand, of 23 January 1995,
Expressing the desire to strengthen and expand the existing foreign economic relations,
Desiring to promote and deepen economic, agricultural, environmental, industrial, technical and technological cooperation on the basis of equality and mutual benefit,
Convinced that this Agreement creates a favorable prerequisite and basis for the further development of bilateral cooperation,
Aware of the importance of environmental protection in the further development of the economy,
within the framework of the current national legislation of their states,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The parties, within the framework of the national legislation of their states, will continue to develop and deepen relations in the field of economy, agriculture, nature protection, industry, engineering and technology.
Article 2
The Parties, in accordance with the objectives set out in Article 1, shall promote, within the limits of their capabilities, the establishment and development of foreign economic relations between enterprises, organizations, associations (hereinafter referred to as enterprises), as well as institutions of their states.
Article 3
In the implementation of joint projects and other forms of cooperation under this Agreement, the Parties shall apply modern, resource-saving and environmentally friendly technologies corresponding to the latest state of technology.
Article 4
Within the framework of the national legislation of their States and taking into account the provisions of Article 3 of this Agreement, the Parties shall promote cooperation in the following areas:
agriculture and forestry, machinery for agriculture and forestry;
food production: processing, storage, packaging and transportation of agricultural products;
light industry, including the production of goods competitive in the world market;
mechanical engineering and metalworking, including the production of equipment for the mining industry, agricultural engineering;
electronic and electrical industry;
rehabilitation, modernization, automation of existing equipment, including conversion;
alternative energy sources (wind energy, biomass, etc.);
metallurgy and construction of metallurgical complexes;
Mining;
medical and pharmaceutical industry;
oil and petrochemical industry;
gas industry;
chemical industry, including plant protection products;
production of building materials;
housing construction and construction of social infrastructure facilities in the regions, rehabilitation and modernization of the construction industry;
expansion and rehabilitation of power plants and electrical networks;
environmental protection and environmental technologies;
health and medical technology;
financial and banking services;
marketing and consulting services;
transfer of technologies and know-how, applied research.
Article 5
The parties will pay the greatest interest to cooperation in the development of environmental and economically acceptable infrastructure systems in the following areas:
agriculture;
nature conservation;
Railways;
air transportation;
water transport;
road construction;
utilities;
telecommunications;
power engineering;
water management;
waste-free recycling of garbage;
tourism.
Article 6
Within the framework of the national legislation of their states:
1. The Parties shall develop tourism on the basis of the recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Tourism and International Travel (Rome, 1963) and the Charter on Tourism and the Tourist Code (Sofia, 1985).
2. Professional, economic, industrial, technical and technological cooperation in the implementation of projects in the field of tourism, as well as in the creation of appropriate infrastructures, will be based on the fundamental principles of environmental protection and high quality of tourist services.
Article 7
Within the framework of the national legislation of their states, the Parties will promote the protection of intellectual property and its implementation on the basis of the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of March 20, 1883.
Article 8
Within the framework of the national legislation of their states, the Parties will pay special attention to the following forms of cooperation:
cooperation agreements between enterprises in order to more efficiently use production capacities, introduce low- and non-waste production, reduce production costs and increase competitiveness;
investments in the areas provided for in this Agreement;
implementation of joint projects in the field of applied research;
harmonization of technical requirements for exported products;
conducting studies, including environmental studies, as well as preparing relevant expert opinions;
organization and holding of joint seminars, symposia, conferences and expert meetings;
consulting services in the field of marketing, strategic planning and production management;
organizing and conducting exhibitions, seminars, exchanges of missions and experts on economic, technical and environmental issues;
technical assistance and exchange of know-how for government agencies.
Article 9
Economic, agricultural, environmental, industrial, technical and technological cooperation between enterprises of the States of the Parties shall be carried out within the framework of this Agreement on a commercial basis and in accordance with the principles of a market economy.
Article 10
The Parties recognize the usefulness and necessity of deeper participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in bilateral economic cooperation and, within the framework of existing capabilities and the current national legislation of their States, will contribute to the development of such cooperation.
Article 11
Each Party shall, within the limits of its capabilities and within the framework of the legislation in force of its State, promote the training and advanced training of specialists and managers of enterprises and institutions of the other Party, particularly in the fields of technology, foreign trade, economic management, environmental protection, tourism, legal protection of industrial property, animal husbandry and crop production, banking, financial and insurance services.
Article 12
The Parties recommend that enterprises of their states resolve controversial issues, first of all, through friendly negotiations. In the event that no agreement is reached, the Parties recommend, within the framework of the national legislation of their States, to use the judicial rules developed by the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) or to resort to the assistance of the arbitral tribunal of the State party to the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards (New York, 10 June 1958).
Article 13
1. In order to promote the deepening and development of bilateral cooperation, this Agreement shall establish the Kazakh-Austrian Intergovernmental Commission on Economic, Agricultural, Environmental, Industrial, Technical and Technological Cooperation (hereinafter referred to as the Commission). Meetings of the Commission will be held in accordance with the agreement and alternately in the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Republic of Austria.
2. The main tasks of the Commission shall be:
discussion of the state and development of bilateral foreign economic relations;
development of proposals for the improvement and intensification of economic, agricultural, environmental, industrial, technical and technological cooperation;
prioritize collaboration;
making recommendations for the implementation of the objectives of this Agreement.
3. Disagreements between the Parties on the interpretation of this Agreement shall be resolved within the framework of the Commission.
4. Within the framework of the first meeting of the Commission, the Parties shall adopt a decision regulating the work of the Commission, including the procedure for financing.
Article 14
1. This Agreement shall not affect the obligations arising from Austria's participation in the European Union. On this basis, the provisions of this Agreement may in no case be applied or interpreted in such a way as to cancel or affect the obligations of the Parties arising from the Treaty on European Union or from the Agreement between the Republic of Kazakhstan and the European Communities or from international treaties to which the Parties are parties.
2. In the event of disagreement on the application of paragraph 1 of this Article, the Parties shall hold joint consultations.
Article 15
Changes or expiration of this Agreement will not prevent the execution of contracts concluded between the enterprises of the Parties during the term of this Agreement.
Article 16
This Agreement, in compliance with the relevant domestic procedures, may be amended and supplemented by mutual agreement of the Parties, which are formalized by separate protocols that are integral parts of this Agreement, and enter into force in the manner prescribed by Article 17 of this Agreement.
Article 17
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the first day of the third month following the month in which the last written notification is received on the fulfillment by the Parties of the domestic procedures necessary for the entry into force of this Agreement.
2. This Agreement shall be concluded for three years and shall be automatically extended for a further year, unless three months before the expiration of this Agreement, one of the Parties sends the other through diplomatic channels a written notice of the intention to terminate it.
Done at Vienna, 10 September 2004, in two original copies, each in the Kazakh, German and Russian languages, all texts being equally authentic.
For the Government
of the Republic of Kazakhstan
For Austrian
Federal Government
