Agreement
between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Estonia
Republics on mutual relations in the field of fisheries
(Moscow, May 4, 1994)
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Estonia, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Desiring to establish a common understanding of the principles of co-operation between the Parties in areas of fisheries of mutual interest,
Taking into account the long-term economic relations between enterprises and organizations of the Parties in the field of fisheries,
Taking into account the commonality of certain Baltic Sea fish stocks exploited by fishermen of both Parties,
Reaffirming its desire to ensure the conservation of fish stocks in the waters covered by the Convention on Fisheries and the Conservation of Living Resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts of 13 September 1973 and, in this regard, the most rational exploitation of these fish stocks,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The Parties shall cooperate both directly and through relevant international organizations to ensure the proper management and conservation of living water resources of interest to both Parties.
Article 2
The Parties shall annually consider the possibility of exchanging fishing quotas on the basis of reciprocity, as well as the conduct of fishing by one Party in the waters of the Baltic Sea under the jurisdiction of the other Party, determine the volume and procedure for conducting such fishing. Agreements on these issues will be formalized by separate protocols, which will enter into force after the necessary domestic procedures have been completed.
Article 3
Fishing shall be conducted in such a way as not to cause damage to vessels and fishing gear duly designated and belonging to another Party. In the event of the adoption of new laws, rules and conditions relevant to the conduct of fisheries, each Party shall notify the other Party in advance.
Article 4
The Parties, in accordance with the legislation of their states, shall encourage contacts and promote cooperation on an equal and mutually beneficial basis between their organizations, enterprises and firms in the following areas of economic activity:
organization and implementation of oceanic fisheries;
organization of joint fisheries enterprises in the territory of any of the Parties;
fish processing and marketing;
shipbuilding and ship repair;
conducting fisheries research;
exchange of scientific information between experts and scientists, as well as between relevant institutions, and ensuring that such information is accessible to fishermen of each Party;
contributing to the prevention of marine pollution affecting marine living resources;
promoting the safety of navigation of fishing vessels of the Parties and the safety of life at sea.
Article 5
The Government of the country of origin of anadromous fish stocks ensures their conservation by taking appropriate measures for their reproduction and rational use.
The Parties shall cooperate in the development and implementation of agreed measures for the protection, regulation and reproduction of the Narva salmon herd.
Article 6
The Parties shall hold annual bilateral consultations on the implementation of this Agreement.
Article 7
This Agreement shall be without prejudice to other existing agreements between both Parties or to multilateral conventions to which they are parties. Nor shall it prejudice the views of either Party with respect to the law of the sea.
Article 8
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of exchange of notes confirming the compliance by the Parties with the domestic procedures necessary for its entry into force.*
This Agreement shall be concluded for a period of five years. It will be automatically extended for subsequent five-year periods, unless either Party gives the other Party, at least six months before the expiration of the relevant period, written notification of its wish to terminate it.
Done at Moscow, this 4th day of May 1994, in two copies, each in the Russian and the Estonian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
(Signatures)
------------------------------
*The Agreement entered into force on 3 June 1994.
