PUBLISHED: BULLETIN OF INTERNATIONAL TREATIES, NOVEMBER 1996
g., N 11, pp. 14-20
GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
AGREEMENT
dated 12.04.96 g.
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION AND THE GOVERNMENT
OF UKRAINE ON COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF TRANSPORTATION
NUCLEAR MATERIALS
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Ukraine,
hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Proceeding from friendly relations between the Russian Federation
and Ukraine,
Striving to develop cooperation in the field of peaceful
use of nuclear energy,
Recognizing the need to transport fresh and
spent nuclear fuel and other nuclear materials between
The Russian Federation and Ukraine,
Bearing in mind the importance of ensuring compliance with the requirements for
safety and physical protection of nuclear materials in their
Transport
Bearing in mind the Agreement on Basic Principles
cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy,
concluded by the CIS member States in Minsk 26
June 1992,
guided by the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation
The Federation and the Government of Ukraine on scientific and technical and
economic cooperation in the field of nuclear energy,
signed on January 14, 1993 in moscow, by the Agreement on
transportation of special cargoes and military products,
concluded CIS member States in Minsk 26
May 1995, documents of the International Atomic Energy Agency
energy (IAEA), as well as operating in the territories of the Russian Federation
The Federation and Ukraine legislation and regulations on
transportation of nuclear materials,
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
The Parties shall cooperate in the field of ensuring the safety of
transportation by rail between The Russian Federation
The Federation and Ukraine of Fresh and Spent Nuclear Fuel,
products and waste from the reprocessing of spent nuclear
fuel, natural uranium, uranium hexafluoride and other nuclear
materials relating to the nuclear fuel cycle, and
empty transport and packaging kits (hereinafter referred to as -
special cargoes).
ARTICLE 2
The competent authorities of the Parties for the implementation of this
The agreements are:
FROM THE RUSSIAN SIDE FROM THE UKRAINIAN SIDE
on the physical protection of special cargoes
(except for protection) and consideration of controversial issues:
Ministry of the Russian Federation State Committee
on atomic energy of Ukraine on the use of
Nuclear Energy
on regulation and supervision of nuclear and radiation
security, as well as physical protection:
Federal Supervision of Russia on the Ministry of Protection
nuclear and radiative natural environment, and
safety of nuclear safety of Ukraine
On issues of ensuring the protection of special cargoes:
Ministry of the Interior Ministry of the Interior
of the Russian Federation of Ukraine
for transportation issues:
Ministry of Railways Ministry of Transport
of the Russian Federation and Ukraine
Ministry of the Russian Federation
atomic energy
On customs control issues:
State Customs Committee State Customs
Russian Federation Committee of Ukraine
On border control issues:
Federal Border Guard Service State Committee for
of the Russian Federation in matters of state protection
borders of Ukraine
on the elimination of the consequences of accidents and the protection of the population in
in the event of a nuclear transport incident
special cargoes:
Ministry of the Russian Federation Civil Defence Headquarters
Atomic Energy and the Ministry of Ukraine
of the Russian Federation in cases
Civil Defense, Emergency
Situations and Aftermath
natural disasters
on the issues of control over the implementation of the requirements of the environmental
Security:
Ministry of The Environment Ministry of Protection
environment and natural resources of the natural environment and
of the Russian Federation for Nuclear Safety
Ukraine.
ARTICLE 3
Transportation of special cargoes between the Russian
The Federation and Ukraine shall implement as a matter of priority
after approval in the planning of traffic accordingly
competent authorities of the Parties on the basis of requirements
legislation and regulations of the Russian Federation and
Ukraine, as well as existing international instruments,
regulating rail transport
special cargoes. A list of these documents is given in the annex
1, which is an integral part of this Agreement.
The Parties shall ensure the confidentiality of information related to
with the transportation of special cargoes, and accept the appropriate
measures to exclude its disclosure.
The competent authorities of the Parties shall inform each other of the intention
transportation of special cargoes not less than 15 days before the start
of these shipments.
ARTICLE 4
Escort of special cargoes during transportation by
the territories of the Russian Federation and Ukraine are carried out
responsible representatives of the Russian side and the Russian side
technical personnel trained to operate in emergency situations
Situations.
The Ukrainian Side on the territory of its state
provides, if necessary, to the accompanying Russian
To the technical staff:
communication channels;
medical care;
technical support of rolling stock and other
necessary collateral.
ARTICLE 5
Each Party, within the framework of this Agreement, shall have its own
national legislation and in accordance with the international
the right to take appropriate measures to ensure the physical
protection of special cargoes within its territory
of the State, at a level not lower than the level envisaged
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material of 3 March 1980
Year.
Protection of special cargoes is carried out on the territory
of the Russian Federation by the Russian armed guard,
of the territory of Ukraine - by the Ukrainian armed guard.
Changing of guard and transfer of security responsibilities
protection of transport with special cargoes are Ukrainian
railway stations Khutor Mikhailovsky and
Kupyansk-Sortirovochny (hereinafter referred to as stations).
Procedure for changing the guard and transferring security responsibilities
protection of transport with special cargoes, conditions of stay
of the Russian armed guard on the territory of Ukraine, order
access of authorized persons to the vehicle is determined in
Annex 2, which forms an integral part of this
Agreement.
On the section of traffic the state border of Ukraine - station
protection of transport with special cargoes is carried out by the Russian
armed guard in accordance with the regulations of the internal troops
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation and Regulations
of this Agreement.
The Ukrainian Side shall ensure on its territory a personal
security of vehicles assigned to guard with special
cargoes of Russian servicemen, from the accommodation,
Unimpeded return to the Russian Federation in full
of the train and with available weapons and equipment, in the case of
of necessity is carried out by their household and medical support
maintenance, as well as the use of communication lines by the guard.
Responsibility for the loss of special cargoes or their part is borne
Party under whose jurisdiction was the guard who carried out
protection of special cargoes at the time of loss, and in cases where
special cargoes were transported without security, - Party, on
of whose territory the loss occurred.
ARTICLE 6
Border, customs and other types of state control
transport, personnel of the guard and escort
technical personnel when they cross the state border
are implemented as a matter of priority in accordance with
laws and regulations of the Russian Federation and
Ukraine.
A guard guard guarding special cargoes is not
prevents border, customs and other types
state control of persons who have presented certificates
relevant control authorities.
ARTICLE 7
Liability for nuclear damage that may be caused
a nuclear incident in the transport of special cargo between
The Russian Federation and Ukraine, bears in accordance with its
by national law, the Party in whose territory
there was a nuclear indident.
Responsibility for this nuclear damage is transferred to another
To the Party at the time of crossing the state border by transport
with special cargoes.
ARTICLE 8
The Ukrainian Side shall assist the Russian Side and
third countries in dealing with transit-related issues
special cargoes through its territory. Implementation modalities
transit of special cargoes through the customs territory of Ukraine
is determined by separate intergovernmental agreements with
participation of the Russian Federation, Ukraine and third countries.
ARTICLE 9
This Agreement may be amended or
additions with the written consent of both Parties.
Controversial issues arising in the implementation of this
Agreements will be decided by the Parties through consultations and
Negotiations.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signing.
The agreement is concluded for an indefinite period and will be valid
until one of the Parties notifies in writing
the other Party at least six months in advance of its intention
terminate it.
Done at Moscow, 12 April 1996, in two true
copies, each in Russian Ukrainian, both
texts are equally authentic.
(Signatures)
ANNEX 1
to the Agreement between the Government
of the Russian Federation and the Government
of Ukraine on cooperation in the field of
transportation of nuclear materials
LIST
INTERNATIONAL INSTRUMENTS REGULATING TRANSPORT
SPECIAL CARGOES BY RAIL AND WATER TRANSPORT
Rules for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Substances (edition series)
IAEA Safety No. 6), 1985, 1990 (corrected)
Rules for the safe transport of spent nuclear fuel from
nuclear power plants of the COMECON member countries. Part 1. Conveyance
by rail, Moscow 1988
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material of 3 March 1980
Year. INFCIRC/274/Rev. 1, IAEA, 1980
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident of 26
September 1986
Convention on Assistance in the Event of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Accident
of the emergency situation of 26 September 1986
International transboundary movement of radioactive waste.
Code of Practice. INFCIRC/386, IAEA, 1990
ANNEX 2
to the Agreement between the Government
of the Russian Federation and the Government
of Ukraine on cooperation in the field of
transportation of nuclear materials
THAT IS OK
CHANGE OF RUSSIAN AND UKRAINIAN GUARDS, TRANSFER OF DUTIES
TO ENSURE THE PROTECTION OF TRANSPORT WITH SPECIAL CARGOES
1. In accordance with the rules in force in the territory
Ukraine, under the protection of vehicles with fresh and with
spent nuclear fuel.
2. The competent authority of the consignor's state,
responsible for ensuring the physical protection of the transport
special cargoes, no later than 15 days before the start
reports the carriage to the relevant competent authority
Consignee State references:
name of the point of transfer of responsibility for protection
vehicle with special loads, date and time
arrival of transport at the specified point;
number of wagons, platforms to be protected;
surname, name, patronymic of the responsible representative of the Russian Federation
The parties accompanying the goods;
emergency card number for special cargo.
3. When transporting fresh nuclear fuel from the Russian
Federations to Ukraine when crossing the state border
responsible representative of the Russian Side, accompanying
cargo, presents to representatives of the customs and border guards
control of Ukraine and the head of the Ukrainian guard guard samples
impressions on the seals of a special cargo, allows access to
office space in the escort car and to the cargo, inspection
radiation safety representatives
State Sanitary and Epidemiological Service and Inspectorate
on supervision of nuclear safety of Ukraine, trailer of the wagon for
placement of the guard guard of the Ukrainian Side.
4. When transporting spent nuclear fuel from the territory
Ukraine to the Russian Federation:
(a) Members of the Russian Guard of the Internal Troops
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation in military uniform
arrive on the territory of Ukraine no later than
than one hour before the arrival of transport with special cargoes;
b) when crossing the state border, the chief
of the Russian guard presents authorized persons with customs
and border control of Ukraine certificate of the head of the guard,
business trip certificate, list of servicemen of the Russian Federation
guards and their identity documents, as well as a list
service weapons. Weapons and ammunition are delivered locked up
a metal box, the keys to which are in the possession of the chief
guards, and are issued to personnel in accordance with the established procedure for
acceptance of special cargo under protection;
c) until the reception of transport with special cargoes under the protection of
application of the head of the Russian guard Ukrainian side
provides premises for temporary accommodation of military personnel
of the Russian Federation, telephone, medical and household
Ensuring, assists in the preservation of
weapons and ammunition;
d) military personnel of the Russian Federation on the territory of Ukraine
comply with the laws of that state, and the functions of protection
transport with special cargoes is carried out in accordance with
the legislation of the Russian Federation;
e) when receiving special cargo under protection, the transport must
be taken out from under the contact network and inhibited by at least
one hour;
(e) The head of the Russian guard after inspecting the transport with
special cargo draws up inventories for guarded transport in 2
Instances. Responsible representative of the Russian Side,
accompanying transport with special cargo, certifies the signature
head of the Russian guard on the reception of transport with a special
cargo under his protection. First copy of the inventory with stamp
of the military unit from which the Russian guard was appointed, and signed
he keeps the head of the guard. In the Chief's Inventory
Ukrainian Guard Responsible Representative of the Russian Guard
The parties accompanying the goods shall sign the delivery from under the
protection of transport with special cargo and the first copy with
he keeps the seal of arms. Second instances of inventories about
reception (delivery) of special cargo, certified by signature
Responsible Representative of the Russian Side, Chiefs
guards are kept;
g) at the end of the procedure for registration of inventories by chiefs
sentries are changed.
5. The cargo is not inspected in case of matching the prints on
seals of special cargo samples, preservation of seals and
Packages.
6. Responsibility for the protection of special cargoes
passes from the moment of signing by the heads of the guards
relevant documents. Procedure for the transfer of the specified
liability shall be determined by the competent authorities of the Parties,
responsible for ensuring the physical protection of special forces
cargo and their protection.
7. Representatives of border and customs services are allowed
head of the guard to the guarded transport with a special
cargo with the permission and in the presence of the responsible representative
the Russian Side accompanying the cargo.
8. In case of disputable issues, the heads of the guards
draw up an act that is approved by the responsible representative
of the Russian Side accompanying the cargo.
This procedure may be applied to the transit of nuclear
materials on the territory of Ukraine.
This procedure may be supplemented and amended with the consent of
both Signatories to the Agreement, in case of change in the terms and conditions
and procedures for the transport of nuclear materials
