AGREEMENT
between the Government of the Russian Federation
and the Government of the Socialist Republic
Viet Nam on cooperation in the field of peace
use of nuclear energy*
_____________

* The Agreement entered into force on 3 June 2002.



The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,


Proceeding from the traditionally friendly relations existing between the two states,


Noting with satisfaction the fruitful results of Russian-Vietnamese economic, scientific and technical cooperation,


Considering that both States are members of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons of 1 July 1968,


Desiring to further expand and deepen mutually beneficial economic, scientific and technical ties between the Russian Federation and the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam on the basis of the principles of equality, non-interference in internal affairs and full respect for the sovereignty of both States,


Attaching great importance to cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy, nuclear and radiation safety, nuclear technologies, agreed as follows:


Article 1


The Parties shall, on the basis of mutual benefit and equality, develop and deepen scientific, technical and economic cooperation in the field of peaceful use of atomic energy in accordance with the legislation of both States and the needs and priorities of their national nuclear programmes.


Article 2


The Parties shall cooperate within the framework of this Agreement in the following areas:


fundamental and applied research in the field of atomic energy;


research in the design, construction and operation of nuclear power plants for the purpose of electricity generation;


ensuring the safe operation of the Vietnamese research reactor in Dalat;


exploration and development of uranium deposits;


radioactive waste management;


nuclear safety, radiation protection of the population and the environment;


accounting, control and physical protection of nuclear materials and radioactive substances;


production of radioisotopes and their application;


radiation technology and its application;


design and manufacture of accelerators used in medicine, industry and other industries;


state regulation of nuclear and radiation safety in the use of atomic energy;


in other areas of cooperation in the field of atomic energy that may be agreed upon by the Parties.


Article 3


The cooperation provided for in Article 2 of this Agreement shall be carried out in the following forms:


training of Vietnamese scientific and technical personnel in the field of nuclear energy use in Russian institutions of higher professional education and research institutes;


exchange of specialists, scientific and technical information, organization of scientific seminars and conferences;


the establishment of joint working groups to carry out specific developments and projects in the field of scientific research and development of nuclear technologies;


supply of nuclear and special non-nuclear materials, equipment and technologies;


consultations on research and technological issues, as well as joint research on agreed programmes;


other forms of cooperation that may be agreed upon by the Parties.


Article 4


To implement this Agreement, the Parties shall appoint the authorized bodies:


from the Russian Side - Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy


from the Vietnamese Side, the Ministry of Science, Technology and Environment of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam.


The authorized bodies of the Parties may involve public and private organizations of their states in the implementation of this Agreement.

     

Article 5
1. In order to perform work and provide services under this Agreement, Russian and Vietnamese organizations involved by the authorized bodies shall conclude contracts that determine the content, scope and cost of work, as well as the timing of their implementation, sources of financing, payment terms and other necessary conditions.


2. Issues of protection and distribution of rights to the results of intellectual activity transferred or created by Russian and Vietnamese organizations in the course of cooperation under this Agreement shall be regulated by the treaties specified in paragraph 1 of this Article, in accordance with the legislation of both states.


Article 6


Issues of civil liability for nuclear damage shall be regulated by treaties concluded by the Parties in the performance of work and the provision of services in the course of cooperation under this Agreement.


Article 7
1. The Parties shall establish a joint Coordination Committee consisting of representatives appointed by the authorized bodies of the Parties to monitor the implementation of this Agreement and consider issues arising in the course of its implementation, as well as to hold consultations on issues of mutual interest.


Meetings of the Coordination Committee shall be held alternately, as appropriate, in the Russian Federation and in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam by agreement of the Parties.


2. Within the framework of the Coordination Committee, if necessary, working groups may be established to discuss the implementation of this Agreement, exchange information in the field of implementation of joint projects and programs, as well as discuss other issues of mutual interest.


Article 8
1. In accordance with this Agreement, information constituting a state secret of the Russian Federation and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam shall not be exchanged.


2. Information transmitted under this Agreement or generated as a result of its implementation and treated as confidential by any Party shall be clearly identified as such.


Each of the Parties shall guarantee the safety of information provided by the other Party and designated by it as having a confidential nature.


3. Confidential information shall be handled in accordance with the legislation of the state of the Party receiving the information. Such information is not disclosed or transferred to a third party not involved in the implementation of this Agreement without the written permission of the Party transmitting such information.


In accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation, such information is treated as service information.

limited distribution. Such information is provided with appropriate protection.


In accordance with the legislation of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, such information is treated as personal information of limited distribution. Such information is provided with appropriate protection.


Article 9


In order to implement the cooperation provided for in this Agreement, the Vietnamese Party guarantees that nuclear materials, technologies, equipment, installations, special non-nuclear materials supplied from the Russian Federation, as well as nuclear and special non-nuclear materials, facilities and equipment produced on their basis or as a result of their use:


are not used for the production of nuclear weapons and other nuclear explosive devices, nor do they contribute to the achievement of any military objective;


are under the control (safeguards) of the IAEA for the entire period of their actual presence or use in the territory or under the jurisdiction of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam;


are provided with physical protection measures not lower than the level recommended by the IAEA;


shall not be re-exported or transferred from the jurisdiction of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam unless otherwise agreed between the Parties.


Equipment, materials and technologies supplied from the Russian Federation that may have dual-use use or replicas thereof used for nuclear purposes shall not be used by the Vietnamese Party in activities for the creation of nuclear explosive devices or in activities in the field of the nuclear fuel cycle not placed under IAEA safeguards shall not be re-exported or transferred to anyone without the written consent of the Russian Party.


The Vietnamese Party shall notify the Russian Party in writing of their location, end-users and areas of application.


Article 10


Disagreements and disputes between the Parties related to the application or interpretation of the provisions of this Agreement shall be resolved by the Parties through consultations and negotiations.


Article 11


This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties under other international treaties to which the Russian Federation and the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are parties.


Article 12
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the last written notification of the fulfillment by the Parties of the internal procedures necessary for its entry into force.


2. This Agreement is concluded for a period of 10 years. It will be automatically extended for subsequent ten-year periods unless one Party notifies the other Party of its intention to terminate it at least one year before the expiration of the next period.


3. Termination of this Agreement shall not affect the performance of contracts concluded during its validity, unless the Parties agree otherwise.


4. Upon termination of this Agreement, the provisions of Articles 8 and 9 shall remain in full force and effect unless the Parties agree otherwise.


5. By mutual agreement of the Parties, this Agreement may be amended and supplemented by separate protocols that come into force in accordance with the procedure established by paragraph 1 of this Article.


Done at Hanoi on 27 March 2002 in two copies, each in the Russian and Vietnamese languages, both texts being equally authentic.


For the Government
of the Russian Federation
V.A.Lebedev

For the Government
Socialist Republic of Vietnam
Bui Man Hai




The text of the document is verified by:

 "Bulletin of International Treaties", 
No. 12, December 2002 
