Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Ukraine on Cooperation in the Operation of Main Oil Product Pipelines (Moscow, July 26, 1995)
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Ukraine, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Taking into account that the main oil product pipelines Samara - Western direction and Grozny - Armavir - Trudovaya, passing through the territory of Ukraine, as well as production and technological communication on them, are an integral technological part of the unified system of main oil product pipelines to provide oil products to consumers of the Parties,
Considering that these oil product pipelines ensure the interrelated operation of a group of refineries of the Russian Federation and the Republic of Belarus,
Considering that these oil product pipelines transport petroleum products to consumers of Ukraine and third countries,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1.
The main oil product pipelines Samara - Western direction and Grozny - Armavir - Trudovaya, passing through the territory of Ukraine, as well as production and technological communication on them (hereinafter referred to as oil product pipeline pipeline facilities), are operated by enterprises of the joint-stock company for pipeline transportation of petroleum products "Transnefteproduct" (hereinafter referred to as AK "Transnefteprodukt"). In performing its functions for the operation of these facilities of oil product pipelines, Transnefteprodukt is guided by the legislation of Ukraine.
Article 2.
Understand by terms: "main oil product pipeline" - an oil product pipeline with linear valves and cathodic protection stations, pumping stations with and without tank tanks, points of control and control of the oil product pipeline, production and technological communication on it, power supply lines for consumers of the oil product pipeline, repair and maintenance points and infrastructure that ensures the safe operation of the oil product pipeline;
"operation of the oil product pipeline" - maintenance and repair of equipment and pipeline.
Article 3.
Operation of oil product pipeline facilities is carried out with the preservation of existing management schemes.
Article 4.
Pumping of petroleum products through pipelines to consumers of Ukraine is carried out on the basis of agreements (contracts) for their transportation concluded with Transnefteprodukt.
Article 5.
Transit of petroleum products through the Samara - Western direction pipeline, passing through the territory of Ukraine, is carried out on the basis of an agreement (contracts) for their
transportation concluded between buyers or sellers and Transnefteprodukt.
Customs clearance of transit deliveries is carried out in accordance with the legislation of the Parties.
Petroleum products pumped through the territory of Ukraine and subsequently reloaded on the railway for transportation to third countries are not subject to customs taxation.
Article 6.
Payment for services to ensure the pumping of petroleum products on the territory of Ukraine is carried out by the enterprises of JSC "Transnefteprodukt" in accordance with the concluded contracts with economic entities of Ukraine.
Article 7.
TRANSNEFTEPRODUKT operates oil product pipeline facilities in compliance with all necessary organizational, technical and environmental measures to ensure the safety of their operation.
Article 8.
The activities of economic entities of the Russian Federation operating oil product pipeline facilities on the territory of Ukraine are regulated by the current legislation of Ukraine.
Article 9.
Diagnostics and cleaning of the internal cavity of pipelines, as well as elimination of the consequences of natural disasters, fires, accidents and damages at oil product pipeline facilities shall be carried out by the Party operating oil product pipelines.
In order to quickly eliminate the consequences of these circumstances and perform these works, the Parties shall grant the right to special emergency and restoration units of oil product pipeline facilities of the Parties to freely import and / or export to the territory of the interested Party the necessary equipment and materials in accordance with the timesheet of technical equipment of these units.
Property temporarily imported into the territory of one of the Parties for a period of up to one year to eliminate the consequences of accidents and carry out scheduled repair work at oil product pipeline facilities is not subject to duty and other taxes in accordance with the legislation of the Parties.
Article 10.
In the event of damage to the natural environment as a result of a violation of the operating technology or accidents at the facilities of petroleum products that occurred due to the fault of maintenance personnel or equipment failure, the enterprises of JSC Transnefteprodukt shall compensate for damage to the Ukrainian Party and / or its economic entities and individuals in accordance with the current legislation of Ukraine.
Article 11.
The Parties agreed to resolve all disputable issues that may arise during the period of validity of this Agreement through negotiations and consultations.
Article 12.
Amendments and additions to this Agreement shall be made by agreement of the Parties.
Article 13.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of receipt of the last notification of the completion by each of the Parties of the necessary domestic procedures.
The Agreement shall cease to be in force after the expiration of six months from the date of written notification by one of the Parties of its intention to terminate it.
Done at Moscow on 26 July 1995 in two copies, each in the Russian and Ukrainian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For Government for Government
of the Russian Federation of Ukraine
/ signature / / signature /
