Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the People's Republic of China on Cooperation in the Field of Research and Use of the World Ocean (Moscow, May 27, 2003)
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the People's Republic of China, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Proceeding from the principles and objectives of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the People's Republic of China on Scientific and Technical Cooperation of 18 December 1992 and the Protocol thereto of 25 February 1999,
Aware of the importance of the full study, development, protection and utilization of the resources and potential of the oceans and seas for peaceful purposes,
Expressing mutual interest in establishing and developing cooperation in this field,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The Parties shall promote the development of cooperation in the field of joint research and peaceful use of the resources and potential of the World Ocean on the basis of equality and mutual benefit, guided by the legislation of the States of the Parties, in accordance with the generally recognized principles and norms of international law and taking into account the international obligations of the States of the Parties.
Article 2
Cooperation is carried out in the following main areas:
fundamental and applied oceanology;
development of mineral resources of the World Ocean;
improvement of legislation in the field of use and protection of the world's oceans;
the study and monitoring of the state of the marine environment, as well as the prediction of natural disasters;
assessment of the environmental impact of activities related to the study and use of the resources and potential of the oceans;
study and protection of marine biodiversity;
studying the role of the seas and oceans in climate and other global changes;
study of the Arctic and Antarctic;
development of new technologies, including the development and practical application of remote methods of oceanographic measurements and oceanographic instruments of new types;
other areas of cooperation agreed upon by the Parties.
The parties consider priority cooperation in the field of using the mineral resources of the World Ocean for peaceful purposes.
Article 3
Cooperation within the framework of this Agreement may be carried out in the following forms:
exchange of specialists, scientists and scientific delegations;
development and implementation of joint projects;
organization of joint scientific experiments and marine expeditions;
exchange of experimental data, research results, scientific and technical information and documentary materials, mutual provision of instruments and equipment, as well as related services;
joint organization of training courses, scientific conferences, seminars and symposia;
joint participation in international tenders and contracts for their implementation;
other forms of cooperation agreed by the Parties.
Article 4
The competent authorities of the Parties shall appoint for the implementation of this Agreement:
from the Russian Side - the Ministry of Natural Resources of the Russian Federation;
from the Chinese side, the State OceanIc Administration of the People's Republic of China.
The competent authorities may designate organizations responsible for the implementation of joint projects.
The competent authorities shall establish a joint working group with the involvement of representatives of organizations responsible for cooperation in the implementation of joint projects.
The functions of the joint working group are:
review of the implementation of joint projects;
approval of new programmes for the implementation of joint projects;
consideration of other issues arising in the course of cooperation in the implementation of this Agreement.
Meetings of the joint working group are held alternately in the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China, usually once every one and a half to two years.
Article 5
The costs associated with the secondment of the members of the joint working group (travel, meals and accommodation in the country of the meeting) shall be met from the funds of the sending Party.
The costs associated with the organization and conduct of the meetings of the joint working group shall be borne by the host Party.
Article 6
Documentary materials, experimental data, samples and research results obtained in the course of the implementation of this Agreement shall be the common property of the Parties. Their transfer by either Party to a third party shall be agreed with the other Party. The Parties will take measures to protect copyrights related to the implementation of this Agreement, in accordance with the legislation of the States of the Parties.
Article 7
Each of the Parties, in accordance with the legislation of its state, shall assist in the entry or exit of personnel, as well as in the import or export of devices and equipment of the other Party necessary for the implementation of joint projects under this Agreement.
Article 8
The Parties shall support and assist research institutes, higher education institutions, companies and organizations of their countries in their research and practical activities on scientific and technical cooperation carried out within the framework of this Agreement.
To this end, the Parties shall facilitate the conclusion of agreements and contracts aimed at implementing the provisions of this Agreement.
The Parties shall not be liable for the obligations of the organizations of their countries arising from the agreements (contracts) concluded by them under this Agreement.
Article 9
Disputes and disagreements related to the implementation of this Agreement shall be resolved by the Parties through consultations and negotiations.
Article 10
This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties arising from other international treaties to which the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China are parties.
Article 11
By agreement of the Parties, this Agreement may be amended and supplemented, which are formalized by separate protocols that are its integral part.
Article 12
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of its signature and shall be concluded for a period of five years. This Agreement shall be automatically extended for subsequent five-year periods if neither Party notifies the other Party in writing of its intention to terminate it at least 6 months before the expiration of the next five-year period.
Termination of this Agreement shall not affect the implementation of any project commenced during the term of this Agreement and not completed by the time of termination.
Done at Moscow on 27 May 2003, in two copies, each in the Russian and chinese languages, both texts being equally authentic.
(Signatures)
