Agreement
between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Ukraine
on cooperation in the field of mercury-containing waste treatment
(Kyiv, May 28, 1997)
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of Ukraine, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Based on the provisions of the Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal,
Guided by the legislation of the Russian Federation and Ukraine and the generally recognized norms of international law,
Taking into account the experience gained in the treatment of mercury-containing wastes,
Aware of the high degree of environmental risk of mercury pollution of the environment,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The Parties will develop and strengthen mutually beneficial and equitable cooperation in the field of mercury-containing waste processing, optimization of mercury production and consumption.
Article 2
Cooperation between the Parties shall be carried out in the following main areas:
processing of mercury-containing waste of Russian enterprises at the Nikitovsk Mercury Plant (Ukraine, Gorlovka);
participation in the development and implementation of state programs and activities of the Parties aimed at optimizing the production and consumption of mercury, processing of mercury-containing waste;
cooperation in the field of standardization, metrology and certification of mercury-containing wastes, conditions of their storage and transportation;
exchange of information, organization of training of specialists.
Article 3
Cooperation within the framework of this Agreement is carried out in accordance with the laws of the Russian Federation and Ukraine by concluding agreements (contracts) between the direct executors. If necessary, under such agreements (contracts), the competent (authorized) bodies of the Parties shall conduct a joint or other examination, issue appropriate permits (licenses) for the processing of toxic waste in an environmentally sound manner.
The supply of mercury-containing waste from the Russian Federation to Ukraine and their processing is carried out in accordance with the regulatory enactments in force in the Russian Federation and in Ukraine, on the basis of a written notification of the State Committee of the Russian Federation for Environmental Protection and the consent (permission) of the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Nuclear Safety of Ukraine.
Transportation of mercury-containing wastes, their packaging and labeling are carried out in accordance with the rules for the transport of dangerous goods in force in the communication between the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
Article 4
For all mercury-containing wastes, passports (certificates) are drawn up containing information on the physical and chemical characteristics, as well as on the composition of these wastes. Such passports (certificates) are an integral part of the notifications and permits referred to above in Article 3 of this Agreement, as well as agreements (contracts) for the supply and processing of waste.
Russian suppliers of mercury-containing waste are obliged to ensure that the physical and chemical characteristics and composition of the supplied waste are specified in passports (certificates). In the event of the delivery of waste in violation of this condition, and if the specified waste cannot be processed in a manner that meets the requirements of environmental protection, the Russian Party shall ensure its return to its territory.
Article 5
Russian suppliers of mercury-containing wastes, prior to their presentation for transportation, must insure their liability for possible damage that may be caused to the carrier, third parties and the environment during the transportation of mercury-containing wastes in accordance with the legislation of the Russian Federation.
Article 6
Coordination of the interaction of the Parties within the framework of this Agreement shall be carried out on the Russian Side by the Ministry of Economy of the Russian Federation and the State Committee of the Russian Federation for Environmental Protection, on the Ukrainian Side by the Ministry of Industry of Ukraine and the Ministry of Environmental Protection and Nuclear Safety of Ukraine.
Article 7
Disputes concerning the interpretation and application of this Agreement shall be resolved through consultation and negotiation. All changes and additions must be made in writing by mutual agreement of the Parties.
Article 8
This Agreement shall enter into force upon receipt of the last notification of the completion by each of the Parties of the necessary domestic procedures.
This Agreement shall terminate upon the expiration of six months from the date on which one of the Parties notifies the other Party in writing of its intention to terminate it. The provisions of this Agreement, after the expiration of its validity, will apply to agreements (contracts) between enterprises and organizations of both countries concluded, but not executed during the period of its validity.
Done at Kiev on 28 May 1997 in two copies, each in the Russian and Ukrainian languages, both texts being equally authentic.
