Agreement between the Council of Ministers - the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan on Cooperation in the Development of the Oil and Gas Industry of Russia (Moscow, March 12, 1993)
The Council of Ministers - the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Recognizing that fuel and energy complexes are interrelated and are the basis for the development of the economy of the Parties,
Guided by the need for further development of the oil and gas industry,
Taking into account the mutual interest of the Parties in the effective use of the raw material base, as well as in investment, scientific, technical and other types of cooperation in these sectors,
proceeding from the principles of the European Energy Charter,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1.
The parties, on the basis of mutual benefit, mutual assistance and prevention of actions that cause economic damage to each other, will develop cooperation in the oil and gas industry in every possible way.
Article 2.
The Parties will take measures to preserve the existing sectoral and intersectoral ties for the supply of equipment, materials, components and other products for the oil and gas industry, their further development and improvement.
Article 3.
The Parties will provide the necessary assistance in the conclusion and implementation of contracts for the supply of equipment, materials, components and other products for the oil and gas industry by associations, enterprises, organizations and other economic entities. At the same time, the volume of supplies of the most important types of products within the allocated quotas is determined annually by a separate Protocol between the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation and the Ministry (Department) as determined by the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan.
Article 4.
The Parties will take measures to ensure the implementation of bilateral and coordination of interstate multilateral programs, scientific, technical and experimental development in the oil and gas industry, the organization of the introduction of new technologies and equipment, effectively using the existing structure and specialization of research and design organizations of the Parties.
Article 5.
The Parties will promote a single coordinated regulatory and technical policy in the oil and gas industry, unification of existing ones
standards and technical specifications, ensuring the unity of norms and rules for the construction of facilities in these industries, their operation, technological management and safety.
Article 6.
The parties will take measures to develop and implement state environmental programs in the oil and gas industry on the basis of a unified methodological approach.
Article 7.
The areas of joint activity of the economic entities of the Parties and the scope of work on exploration, arrangement and development of oil and gas fields, construction of roads, housing and social and cultural facilities will be determined annually by a separate Protocol between the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation and the Ministry (Department) to determine the Government of the Republic of Tajikistan after coordination in accordance with the established procedure by local bodies and approval by the Government  of the Russian Federation.
Article 8.
The parties will promote the creation of joint ventures for the exploration, development and operation of new oil and gas fields, the repair and commissioning of idle wells, the expansion of the use of secondary methods of oil production, the development of production and social infrastructure in the areas of oil and gas production.
Article 9.
The Parties shall ensure the unimpeded and duty-free import and export of technological and technical means, materials and mechanisms belonging to economic entities participating in the implementation of this Agreement and used for its purposes.
Article 10.
Mutual settlements for works performed in accordance with this Agreement will be carried out on the terms provided for in the agreements (contracts) concluded between economic entities.
Article 11.
The Parties shall ensure the protection of the rights and guarantees of citizens of the Russian Federation working in the territory of the Republic of Tajikistan and citizens of the Republic of Tajikistan working in the territory of the Russian Federation.
Article 12.
The parties will provide mutual assistance in the elimination of the consequences of natural disasters and catastrophes at oil and gas industry facilities, in financing individual joint works to improve the reliability and sustainability of the operation of such facilities.
Article 13.
The parties will take appropriate measures to ensure the stable operation of the main oil, gas pipelines and oil product pipelines passing through their territories, and will ensure unhindered transit through their territories of oil, gas and petroleum products.
Article 14.
The Parties intend to resolve all disputable issues arising in connection with the interpretation and application of this Agreement through negotiations and consultations.
Article 15.
The parties agreed that unilateral modification of the terms of this Agreement is not allowed. All amendments and additions to this Agreement are valid only if they are written and signed by authorized representatives of the Parties.
The Parties confirm that disputes arising between economic entities of the Parties during the conclusion and execution of contracts for the implementation of this Agreement shall be considered in accordance with the established procedure by courts, arbitration (economic) or arbitration courts.
Article 16.
The Parties undertake to organize an operational exchange of information on the implementation of this Agreement.
Article 17.
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of signature and shall remain in force until the expiration of one year from the date on which one of the Parties notifies the other Party in writing of its intention to terminate it.
Done on 12 March 1993 at Moscow in two copies, each in the Russian and Tajik languages, both texts being equally authentic.
