CONTRACT
on eternal friendship between the Republic of Uzbekistan,
The Republic of Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic
10 January 1997
The treaty was ratified by the Resolution of the Oliy Majlis
Of the Republic of Uzbekistan N 486-I of 30.08.1997
Republic of Uzbekistan, Republic of Kazakhstan and Kyrgyz
The Republic, hereinafter referred to as the High Contracting Parties,
building on the historically strong ties between the three
States
Considering that the strengthening of friendly relations and good-neighbourliness,
cooperation and mutual assistance between high contracting parties
The Parties shall serve the fundamental interests of their peoples, serve the cause of peace and
Security
Reaffirming its commitment to international law,
first of all, the purposes and principles of the UN Charter, the Helsinki Final
Act and other documents adopted within the framework of the OSCE,
Aware of the responsibility for political stability, and
interethnic harmony in the region, which are the basis of economic
development and spiritual revival of their peoples,
Considering it necessary to deepen economic cooperation
three countries within the framework of the Common Economic Space, the creation of
favorable conditions for its further development, establishment of direct
relations between economic entities of all forms of ownership,
with a view to further strengthening the relationship of eternal friendship between
three states based on the proximity of history, culture, language and
Traditions
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
Republic of Uzbekistan, Republic of Kazakhstan and Kyrgyz
The Republic, being fraternal and friendly states, build
its relations on the basis of large-scale cooperation and mutual
Trust.
The High Contracting Parties will develop relations on
based on respect for independence, sovereignty, territorial
integrity and inviolability of state borders, principles
non-interference in each other's internal affairs, equality and mutual
Benefits.
Article 2
The High Contracting Parties shall develop cooperation,
providing versatile support, first of all, in matters
prevention of threats to independence and sovereignty, territorial
integrity and the conduct of an independent policy.
Article 3
The High Contracting Parties undertake not to allow
the use of its territory for the purpose of armed aggression, or
hostile activities against other High Contracting Parties.
In the event of a situation that, in the opinion of one of the
The High Contracting Parties pose a threat of armed
attacks by other States, High Contracting Parties
The Parties shall immediately consult with each other in an appropriate manner.
the other, both on a trilateral basis and within the framework of international
organizations of which they are members, with a view to taking action,
contributing to the peaceful resolution of this situation, and
ensuring joint defense.
Article 4
In order to ensure the sustainable development of trilateral
relations, exchange of views on international regional issues
The High Contracting Parties shall hold mutual consultations
at different levels.
In the course of consultations, the High Contracting Parties shall
coordinate positions on regional and global issues,
affecting the common interests of the High Contracting Parties,
their consideration in international organizations whose members are parties
Are.
Article 5
The High Contracting Parties shall implement
cooperation in order to make the fullest use of the potential of the UN. With
to this end, the High Contracting Parties shall make every effort to
strengthening the role of the United Nations in maintaining peace and international security, and
other areas.
Article 6
The High Contracting Parties attach great importance to
establishment of a Central Asian under the auspices of the United Nations
a battalion of peacekeeping forces assigned to carry out a mission on
principles of the UN peacekeeping force and will do all
the necessary measures to ensure the activities of the battalion.
Article 7
The High Contracting Parties, convinced that
strengthening regional cooperation contributes to well-being and
security of the countries of the region, will contribute to the expansion of
and regional cooperation in Central Asia.
The High Contracting Parties agreed on
the need for regional cooperation without any
coercion, including political, economic and financial.
Article 8
The relevant Offices of the High Contracting Parties shall
interact with each other in such a way as not to apply in
some form of damage to the relations of friendship and cooperation between the three
States, and in the event of disputes, to resolve them in
a spirit of trust and mutual understanding through the establishment of conciliation commissions
at the governmental level, if the need arises.
Article 9
The High Contracting Parties shall develop economic,
trade relations, relations in the field of culture, science and technology on
broad-based and taking into account long-term prospects.
To this end, the High Contracting Parties shall establish
necessary legal, economic, financial and trade conditions for
a gradual transition to a wide and efficient movement of goods,
services and capital between countries.
High Contracting Parties will strengthen cooperation
in the field of industry, agriculture, transport, tourism,
sports, health, communications and telecommunications, energy, security
Environment.
Article 10
The High Contracting Parties shall grant to their nationals,
travelling to one of the High Contracting Parties for permanent
residence, the right to freely dispose of one's property, including
and per means of production in accordance with the national
by the laws of the Parties.
Article 11
The High Contracting Parties shall implement
cooperation in the development of transport communications, transit
goods and services on favourable and mutually beneficial terms.
The High Contracting Parties reaffirm the need for
use of their economic potential in the formation of
The Trans-Asian Railway and Highway, and
and the development of transit transport cooperation.
Article 12
The High Contracting Parties will encourage contacts between
cultural and educational institutions of the three countries, as well as exchange
Specialists. Each of the High Contracting Parties shall ensure
its citizens have broad access to the study of language and culture,
works of art, literature and printing of other High
the Contracting Parties.
Article 13
The High Contracting Parties attach priority to
ensuring environmental safety, acting in accordance with
bilateral and multilateral treaties in this field.
The High Contracting Parties shall take the necessary measures
to prevent environmental pollution and ensure
rational use of natural resources. They contribute to the development and
the implementation of joint special environmental programmes and
Projects.
Each of the High Contracting Parties shall render
emergency assistance to other Parties in environmental disasters, and
natural phenomena that pose a threat to the livelihoods of the population.
The High Contracting Parties shall endeavour to
rebalancing the disturbed ecosystems of the region and, above all,
in the basin of the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers, the Aral Sea.
Article 14
The High Contracting Parties will promote enlargement
contacts between the parliaments of the three countries.
Article 15
Each of the High Contracting Parties shall guarantee to its citizens
other Parties residing in its territory, irrespective of their
nationality, religion or other distinction,
social, economic and cultural rights and freedoms in accordance with
universally recognized international human rights law.
Article 16
The High Contracting Parties will cooperate in combating
international terrorism, organized crime, illegal
trafficking in narcotic substances, arms smuggling, and
monuments of culture and art, crimes in the field of transport and
other types of crime.
Article 17
This Treaty shall not be directed against other States and neither
what form does not affect any rights and obligations arising from
from existing bilateral and multilateral High Treaties
Contracting Parties with other States.
Article 18
In accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, this Treaty
is subject to registration with the UN Secretariat.
Article 19
This Treaty shall be subject to ratification and shall enter into force on the date of the
exchange of instruments of ratification by the High Contracting Parties.
Done at Bishkek on 10 January 1997 at the age of three
copies, each in Uzbek, Kazakh, Kyrgyz and Russian
languages, and all texts are equally authentic.
For the Republic of Uzbekistan For the Republic of Kazakhstan
For the Kyrgyz Republic
