AGREEMENT
between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the People's Republic of China on the continuation of cooperation in the energy sector



The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the People's Republic of China, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,

proceeding from the principles of equality, mutual benefit and long-term cooperation, effective and fruitful joint work in the field of energy,

Taking into account the expiration of the Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the People's Republic of China on the Joint Deployment of Cooperation in the Energy Sector of 25 April 1996,

in order to ensure continuity of the legal framework for cooperation in this field,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1


The parties cooperate in the following main areas.

1. Cooperation in the field of gas industry:

(a) Natural gas supply projects from the Russian Federation to the People's Republic of China and possibly to third countries, including:

a project for the construction of a pipeline from the Kovykta gas condensate field in the Irkutsk region of the Russian Federation to the People's Republic of China, as well as to potential consumers in third countries and the development of the Kovykta gas condensate field;

a project for the construction of a pipeline from Chayandinskoye and other gas fields of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) to the People's Republic of China and the development of Chayandinskoye and other gas fields;

a project for the supply of natural gas from Western Siberia of the Russian Federation to the People's Republic of China;

(b) Technical cooperation in the establishment of infrastructure in the gas industry, including:

study of existing and planned gas pipeline networks;

study on underground gas storage facilities in the People's Republic of China;

c) participation in the development and development of gas fields;

d) other topics and cooperation projects identified by the Parties.

2. Cooperation in the field of oil industry:

(a) A project for the construction of a pipeline for the supply of oil from the Russian Federation to the People's Republic of China, with the possibility of supply to potential consumers in third countries, including through the seaports of the People's Republic of China;

b) supply of crude oil, including that produced by Chinese oil companies in the territory of the Republic of Kazakhstan, through the Russian Federation to the People's Republic of China and third countries by substitution. The parties, in accordance with the legislation of their states, will create favorable conditions for crude oil trade between enterprises of the two states;

c) participation in the development and development of oil fields;

d) other topics and cooperation projects identified by the Parties.

3. Cooperation in the field of electric power industry:

(a) Cooperation in the field of electricity supply, joint study of electricity supply issues, including research on the expansion of cross-border trade in electricity taking into account the needs of the market;

b) development of mutually beneficial scientific and technical cooperation in the following areas:

ensuring the stability and reliability of the functioning of energy systems;

training of dispatching and operating personnel of energy systems of the Russian Federation, the People's Republic of China and third countries;

c) other topics and cooperation projects identified by the Parties.

4. Study of issues of development, design, production, including joint, and mutual supply of machinery and equipment for the implementation of cooperation projects in the areas set forth in paragraphs 1-3 of this article.

5. Cooperation in the field of coal industry:

(a) To study the improvement of coal mining techniques and technology;

b) exchange of experience and information in the field of improving the mechanisms of socio-economic and legal regulation in the coal industry of the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China;

c) exchange of information and cooperation on safety and legal regulation in mine operations;

d) other topics and cooperation projects identified by the Parties.

6. Other cooperation in the energy sector as determined by the Parties.

Article 2


For the purposes of this Agreement, the authorized bodies of the Parties shall be:

from the Russian Side - the Russian part of the subcommission on cooperation in the field of energy of the Commission for the preparation of regular meetings of the heads of government of Russia and China;

from the Chinese side - the Chinese part of the subcommission on cooperation in the field of energy of the Commission for the preparation of regular meetings of the heads of government of Russia and China.

During the implementation of this Agreement, the authorized bodies of the Parties shall be guided by the decisions of the Commission on the preparation of regular meetings of the Heads of Government of Russia and China, as well as the decisions fixed in the protocols of the Subcommission on Cooperation in the Field of Energy, after their approval by the Commission for the preparation of regular meetings of the Heads of Government of Russia and China.

Article 3


The Parties shall support the implementation of the areas and projects of cooperation referred to in Article 1 of this Agreement, for which they shall create the necessary conditions on the basis of mutual agreement, equality and mutual benefit.

Article 4


The authorized bodies of the Parties jointly carry out planning and organization of the solution of all issues of cooperation.

Article 5


The competent authorities of the Parties shall, if necessary, hold consultations on the involvement of third countries in the work on relevant feasibility studies.

Article 6


This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties arising from other international treaties to which the Russian Federation and the People's Republic of China are parties.

Article 7


This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of signature and shall be valid for a period of three years. This Agreement shall be automatically extended for two years unless one of the Parties informs the other Party in writing of its intention to terminate the Agreement three months before the expiration of its term. If, during the term of the Agreement, either Party informs the other Party in writing of its intention to terminate it, this Agreement shall terminate six months from the date of receipt of the notification by the other Party.

Termination of this Agreement will not entail the termination of cooperation in areas and projects previously agreed by the Parties.

Done at Beijing on 18 July 2000, in two copies, each in the Russian and chinese languages, both texts being equally authentic.

(Signatures)
