AGREEMENT
between the Government of the Russian Federation and
The Government of the Republic of Korea on cooperation
in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex



The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Korea, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,

Proceeding from the desire to strengthen and develop bilateral cooperation in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex on the principles of equality and mutual benefit,

Striving to develop economic, scientific and technical cooperation in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex, based on the fact that the economic structures of the two countries in this field are complementary,

Considering that the cooperation of the Parties in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex will help to ensure the stability of the supply of energy resources from the Russian Federation to the Republic of Korea, as well as to promote the development of these industries in the Russian Federation,

Confident that the expansion of cooperation in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex will assist in the further development of friendly relations between the Parties,

Have agreed as follows:

Article 1

1. The parties will promote the development of cooperation between the two countries in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex.

2. The Parties shall take appropriate measures in areas of mutual interest, including the development and trade of fuel and energy resources and issues of scientific and technical research in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex, as well as energy policy.

Article 2

1. The Parties, in accordance with the legislation of their states, on the basis of mutual benefit, will promote the development of cooperation in the following areas:

a) invitation to participate in tenders (tenders) and study of proposals for participation in them, exchange of information on tenders (tenders) for joint projects;

b) implementation of joint projects in the field of production, production, processing and transportation of fuel and energy resources;

c) supply of materials and services, as well as participation in construction in order to implement joint projects;

d) formation of joint ventures for the implementation of promising projects;

e) development of closer relations between enterprises and organizations of both countries;

(e) Exchange of relevant information and data for the development of promising projects for joint implementation;

g) providing support to their enterprises and organizations in the implementation of joint projects.

2. The Parties will facilitate the conclusion of contracts and agreements that define the rights and obligations of the participating companies and organizations.

Article 3


The Parties may, in accordance with the legislation of their states, invite interested third countries, as well as interested companies and financial institutions of third countries, to participate in cooperation within the framework of joint projects.

Article 4

1. The Parties shall cooperate in the field of trade in fuel and energy resources.

2. The Parties will cooperate in the exchange of information related to trade in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex.

Article 5


The Parties shall, to the extent possible, exchange information in areas such as:

(a) Energy policy and regulatory frameworks;

b) the current situation and forecasts for the development of the fuel and energy sectors: coal, oil, gas industry and electric power industry;

c) energy technologies;

d) other areas of the fuel and energy complex of mutual interest.

Article 6


The parties will stimulate the development of relations in the following areas in the sectors of the fuel and energy complex:

(a) Development and conduct of joint research in the field of exploration and development, processing and transportation of fuel and energy resources;

b) exchange of specialists, researchers and experts;

c) conducting seminars, symposia and exhibitions.

Article 7


The competent authorities responsible for the implementation of this Agreement shall be:

from the Russian Federation - the Ministry of Energy of the Russian Federation;

from the Republic of Korea, ministry of trade, industry and energy of the Republic of Korea.

Article 8


The Parties shall form a Mixed Committee of their representatives to discuss the implementation of this Agreement. Meetings of the committee will be held annually at the dates agreed by the Parties alternately in the Russian Federation and in the Republic of Korea.

Article 9


This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties arising from other multilateral and bilateral treaties and agreements to which their States are parties.

Article 10


Any dispute or controversy concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement will be resolved through consultations between the Parties.

Article 11

1. This Agreement shall enter into force by exchanging diplomatic notes notifying the Parties of the completion of all legal procedures necessary for its entry into force.

2. This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period and will be valid until the expiration of 6 months from the date of sending one of the Parties written notification to the other Party of its intention to terminate it.

3. This Agreement may be amended by mutual agreement of the Parties. The amended articles of the Agreement shall enter into force by the exchange of diplomatic notes notifying the Parties of the completion of all legal procedures necessary for their entry into force.

Modification or termination of this Agreement will not affect the rights and obligations of the Parties arising or arising under this Agreement in the period up to the date of amendment or termination.

Done at Moscow in duplicate on 10 October 2000, each in the Russian, Korean and English, all texts being equally valid. In the event of a disagreement in interpretation, the English text shall be used.

(Signatures)
