AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE CABINET OF MINISTERS OF THE REPUBLIC OF BELARUS AND THE GOVERNMENT
OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION ON DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION
FUEL AND ENERGY COMPLEXES *)
_____________________________
*) Entered into force on 19 September 1995.
The Cabinet of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus and the Government
of the Russian Federation, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Guided by the Treaty establishing the Economic Union, and
Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Belarus and
The Government of the Russian Federation on trade and economic
cooperation in 1994,
based on the feasibility of maintaining and developing
long-term basis of specialization, cooperation and technological
interrelated productions,
Recognizing the need for joint development and implementation
targeted programs and projects of scientific and technical cooperation in
branches of fuel and energy complexes,
Taking into account the mutual interest of the Parties in the effective
use of the raw material base, organization of joint ventures and
interstate companies in the fuel and energy sectors
complexes, creation of favorable conditions for improvement
market relations between economic entities,
HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
Article 1
Parties on the basis of mutual benefit, mutual assistance and non-admission
actions that cause economic damage to each other will be in every possible way.
to develop cooperation in the fuel and energy sectors
Complexes.
Article 2
The parties identified the Ministry of Energy and Fuel of the Republic
Belarus, Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation
state customers for mutual deliveries
fuel and energy resources and the most important types of quota and
licensed products.
Article 3
The parties will instruct the Ministry of Energy and Fuel of the Republic
Belarus, Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation
determine annually the volume of interrelated deliveries of products,
economic entities responsible for the implementation of deliveries to
within the framework of this Agreement. The agreements reached are being formalized
protocols that are an integral part of this Agreement.
Article 4
The parties will instruct the Ministry of Energy and Fuel of the Republic
Belarus, Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation
ensure coordination of the work of the relevant economic entities
to carry out, on an equivalent basis, interrelated deliveries
fuel and energy resources and the most important types of quota and
licensed products for enterprises of these ministries and
Departments. Nomenclature and volumes of supplied products at
the needs can be specified by state customers.
Non-compliance by government customers with equivalence
monthly mutual deliveries of these products are considered as
granting one of them a commodity credit requiring
appropriate compensation as agreed between them.
Related product deliveries are exempt from charging
export and import customs duties.
The cost of interrelated supplies is determined by
on an agreed basis based on the price level (in United States dollars),
close to the world.
Article 5
Payments for the supply of products between enterprises and
organizations of the Republic of Belarus and the Russian Federation will
are carried out at negotiated prices except for settlements for
supply of certain types of goods, the prices for which are set
regulations in force in States, or
special intergovernmental agreements.
Article 6
The parties will determine the procedure for imposing sanctions for
untimely supply of fuel and energy resources and others
critical resources, while retaining the right to unilaterally
procedure to review, with prior notice, volumes
supply of products in case of non-fulfillment by one of the Parties of its
obligations on mutual deliveries.
Article 7
The parties will promote the creation of joint ventures
of various forms of ownership on a joint-stock basis in accordance with
the current legislation of the states of both Parties.
The products of these enterprises are supplied without licenses
and payment of customs duties in accordance with intergovernmental
Protocols.
Article 8
The parties agreed on the development of national energy
Programmes to conduct mutual consultations with a view to further
deepening of integration ties, development of scientific and technical
cooperation, introduction of new technologies in industries
fuel and energy complexes of the Republic of Belarus and the Russian
Federation.
Article 9
The Parties will take measures to develop and implement environmental
programs in the sectors of fuel and energy complexes based on
unified methodological approaches to ensure the speedy
achievement of international environmental standards.
Article 10
The parties agreed that the regions of joint activity, in that
the amount of work on the exploration, arrangement and development of coal,
oil and gas fields, for supply and processing
fuel and energy resources, oil product supply, repair
and construction of facilities of fuel and energy complexes and their
infrastructure in the territories of the Republic of Belarus and the Russian Federation
Federations are defined by annual separate protocols between
Ministry of Energy and Fuel of the Republic of Belarus,
Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation.
Article 11
The parties will cooperate in the elimination of the consequences
natural disasters and accidents, as well as fund individual
joint work to improve the sustainability of functioning
facilities of fuel and energy complexes.
Article 12
Parties will take appropriate measures to ensure sustainable operation
main power lines and oil product pipelines,
passing through their territories, and will exercise unhindered
transit, including export, of electricity, hydrocarbon
raw materials, petroleum products and coal.
The volumes of transit of energy resources of the Parties for export shall be determined
separate protocol between the Ministry of Energy and Fuel
the Republic of Belarus and the Ministry of Fuel and Energy of the Russian Federation
The Federation, which is an integral part of the present
Agreement.
Article 13
The parties will provide mutual assistance in the decision
necessary social issues by extending to
specialists involved in the performance of works on the sites
fuel and energy complexes of the Parties, national regimes in
and the provision of social rights and guarantees.
Article 14
Controversial issues arising during the execution of contracts
(contracts) concluded as a follow-up to this Agreement shall be subject to
consideration by agreement of the Parties by arbitral tribunals, if before
there will be no mutually acceptable solution to that effect.
Questions arising from interpretation or application
the provisions of this Agreement will be resolved through negotiations
and consultations in the light of international law.
Article 15
The parties will instruct the Ministry of Energy and Fuel of the Republic
Belarus, the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Belarus and the Ministry of Fuel and Energy
Russia, the State Customs Committee of Russia to organize a quarterly exchange of information on
and the implementation of this Agreement.
Article 16
This Agreement shall enter into force upon mutual exchange
notifications confirming the fulfillment of the necessary
domestic procedures, and will remain in force until
expiration of six months from the date on which one of the Parties notifies the
writing to the other Party of its intention to terminate it
action.
Done in Moscow on 1.09.1994 in two original copies,
each in Belarusian and Russian, with both texts having
equal force.
For the Government of the Republic of Belarus _______
For the Government of the Russian Federation _______
