PROTOCOL
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
THE REPUBLICS AND THE ROYAL GOVERNMENT OF AFGHANISTAN ON
JOINT WORK ON A COMPREHENSIVE
USE OF WATER RESOURCES
THE AMU-DARYA RIVER ON THE BORDER SECTION BETWEEN
THE SOVIET UNION AND AFGHANISTAN
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
The Royal Government of Afghanistan, Seeking Further Expansion
and strengthening economic cooperation between the two countries,
Taking into account the interest of both countries in integrated use
water resources of the border section of the Amu-Darya River,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
The Royal Government of Afghanistan agrees to cooperate in
work on joint integrated use of water resources
the Amu-Darya River in the area bordering between the Soviet Union and
Afghanistan, and in particular, on the section of the river near Kelif.
Whereas the necessary research on law
The (Soviet) bank of the Amu-Darya River has already been carried out by the Soviet Side and with
the Afghan side got acquainted with the results of these surveys during the
negotiations on the conclusion of this Protocol, the Parties agreed
to carry out in 1958-1959 survey work on the left (Afghan) bank
the Amu-Darya River.
These works will be carried out in accordance with the agreed
technical experts of both Parties by the Programme annexed to this
The Protocol and its integral part.
Article 2
To carry out survey and research work,
provided for in Article 1 of this Protocol, corresponding to the Soviet
organizations send a group of Soviets to Afghanistan at their own expense
professionals equipped with the equipment necessary to perform
of these works. Soviet specialists will conduct survey and
research work together with Afghan specialists,
designated for this purpose by the Afghan Party.
Article 3
After carrying out survey and research work, the Soviet
organizations together with Afghan specialists on the basis of the received
Baseline data will be prepared within 6 months of a feasibility report
on the results of survey and research work, and will present it
To the governments of both countries.
After consideration by the Governments of both countries of the technical and economic
report and, if there is an interest of both countries in joint
further work on integrated water resources management
Amu-Darya River. The parties will additionally agree on the principles, scope,
terms and other conditions for the implementation of design and construction works,
aimed at the integrated use of water resources of the Amu River
Daria.
Article 4
The Afghan Party at the time of implementation of the survey and
research works will be provided to Soviet specialists,
sent to Afghanistan in accordance with Article 2 of this
Protocol, the right to repeatedly cross the Soviet-Afghan border in
points to be agreed between the competent Soviet and
Afghan organizations.
Article 5
The Afghan Side will provide all possible assistance in the implementation of
survey and research works provided for herein
Protocol, and in particular will provide the necessary facilities for
accommodation of Soviet specialists and for the organization of survey bases,
organizes water supply and public services, and
will make the necessary pack at the disposal of the survey parties
transport.
Article 6
The Afghan Side agrees not to levy customs duties on
import to Afghanistan and when re-exporting to the Soviet Union of transport
means, fuel, equipment and other materials necessary for
carrying out survey and research works provided for
this Protocol, as well as when importing food products into Afghanistan
goods and medicines intended for the supply of Soviet
specialists engaged in these jobs.
Article 7
This Protocol shall enter into force on the date of its signature.
Done at Kabul, 25 June 1958, in two copies, each in two copies.
Russian and Persian, with both texts having the same force.
(Signatures)
