Agreement
between the Governments of the German Democratic Republic,
Polish People's Republic and Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics on cooperation in the field of marine fisheries
(Warsaw, July 28, 1962)
 
     The Governments of the German Democratic Republic, the People's Republic of Poland and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
     Having a mutual interest in cooperation in the development of marine fisheries, the development of fishing techniques and technology for the processing of fishery products, as well as in scientific research on the status of the living resources of the sea,
     Have decided to conclude this Agreement and, to this end, have appointed their commissioners, who, after an exchange of their powers, as duly and in good order, have agreed as follows.
 
Article 1
 
     The Contracting Parties agree to cooperate in the development of fisheries in the high seas, to hold consultations on practical issues of fishing organization, to exchange information on the results of commercial exploration of fish and other non-fish resources of the sea, to coordinate efforts in the field of research on the raw material base in the high seas, as well as to exchange experience in the field of fishing techniques and the production of fish products, their transportation and storage.
 
Article 2
 
     A Mixed Commission shall be established for the purpose of developing, coordinating and implementing measures for the application of this Agreement.
     Within one month of the entry into force of this Agreement, each Contracting Party shall appoint a representative and a deputy Representative to that Commission and shall communicate their names to the other Contracting Parties.
     The Mixed Commission shall be convened at least once a year alternately in the territory of each of the Contracting Parties, the costs of holding the sessions being borne by the Party in whose territory the sessions are held. The place and date of convening of the Mixed Commission will be determined in advance by the Commission.
     The Mixed Commission shall act on the basis of the Statutes drawn up at its first meeting and approved by the Contracting Parties.
 
Article 3
 
     The functions of the Mixed Commission are as follows:
     1) Develop plans for scientific and technical cooperation and mutual assistance in the development of fisheries in the high seas;
     2) Organize a mutual exchange of experience in the operation of the fleet, the fishing industry, fishing, storage, processing and transportation of fish, as well as information on the results of prospecting and research of living marine resources conducted by the Contracting Parties;
     3) Make proposals for the convening of scientific and technical conferences and meetings on various fisheries issues of common interest to the Contracting Parties, as well as organize the exchange of experience in the field of training;
     (4) Determine the nature and extent of the statistical and other material submitted by each Contracting Party to the Mixed Commission for the implementation of this Agreement;
     (5) Consider other matters which may be entrusted to it by the Contracting Parties.
 
Article 4
 
     The Joint Commission shall make recommendations to the Contracting Parties on the matters referred to in Article 3.
     Recommendations and decisions shall be deemed to have been adopted by the Mixed Commission if they are voted for by the representatives of all the Contracting Parties.
     The recommendations of the Mixed Commission shall be submitted for approval by the Contracting Parties and shall be implemented if, within two months, neither Party raises its objections.
 
Article 5
 
     This Agreement shall be approved in accordance with the laws of each Contracting Party.
     Notifications of approval of this Agreement shall be transmitted to the Government of the People's Republic of Poland, which shall perform the functions of the depositary.
     This Agreement will enter into force on the date of receipt of the last notice of approval of the Agreement.
 
Article 6
 
     This Agreement is concluded for a period of five years. It shall remain in force for every subsequent five years for Contracting Parties which do not denounce the Agreement not later than six months before the expiry of each five-year period.
 
Article 7
 
     The Government of the People's Republic of Poland shall take appropriate measures to register this Agreement with the Secretariat of the United Nations.
 
     Done at Warsaw, this 28th day of July 1962, in a single copy, in the German, Polish and Russian languages, all texts being equally authentic.
 
By Authorization By Authorization By Authorization By Authorization
Government of the Government of the Government
German Polish People's Union of Soviets
Democratic Republic of Socialist
Republics of the Republics
 
V.Mannel S.Darski A.Ishkov

