CONTRACT
                between the Republic of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan
                The Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and
                 The Republic of Uzbekistan on the establishment of
           "Central Asian Cooperation" organization

                         28 February 2002

      Preamble                                                        
      Article 1.  Establishment of the Organization                                
      Article 2.  Goals and objectives                                         
      Article 3.  Membership                                              
      Article 4.  Organs                                                
      Article 5.  Council of Heads of State and Prime Ministers             
      Article 6.  Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs                       
      Article 7.  Committee of National Coordinators                    
      Article 8.  Financing                                        
      Article 9.  Observers                                           
      Article 10. Capacity                                      
      Article 11. Procedure for adoption and execution of decisions                 
      Article 12. Privileges and immunities                               
      Article 13. Changes and additions                                
      Article 14. Tongue                                                  
      Article 15. Sign up                                           
      Article 16. Relation to other treaties                          
      Article 17. Depository                                           
      Article 18. Duration and entry into force                     



 
        Republic of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of
Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan, hereinafter referred to as the Contracting Parties
Side
        relying on the deep traditions of friendship and good-neighborliness,
the historical and cultural community of the fraternal peoples of Central Asia,
        Based on the importance of interaction in matters of security
regional security and stability, joint confrontation
any manifestations of terrorism and extremism organized by
crime, drug trafficking,
        driven by the desire to achieve further deepening
interstate cooperation in the field of political, economic
and cultural and humanitarian relations aimed at raising the level of
the lives of the peoples of the region,
        Reaffirming its commitment to universally recognized principles, and
international law,
        Noting that the Central Asian Economic Community
has played an important role in the socio-economic progress of
Central Asia and in strengthening stability and security in the region,
        in accordance with the Tashkent Statement of the Heads of State
the Republic of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and
Of the Republic of Uzbekistan of 28 December 2001,
        Have agreed as follows:


 
        Article 1. Establishment of the Organization

        In order to further promote and diversify the political
dialogue, improvement of forms and mechanisms of regional economic
integration, intensification of multifaceted cooperation in the field of
political, trade-economic, scientific-technical, cultural-
Humanitarian relations, the Contracting Parties transform
Central Asian Economic Community to the Organization "Central-
Asian Cooperation" (hereinafter referred to as CAC).
        Previously concluded between the Contracting Parties within the framework of
Central Asian Economic Community treaties and agreements,
as well as the decisions of the Heads of State continue to operate in the part that not
contrary to this Agreement.
        The CAC is established on the basis of goodwill, respect for sovereignty,
territorial integrity, equality, as well as responsibility
member states for the implementation of the provisions of this Treaty.


 
        Article 2. Goals and objectives

        The main goals and objectives of the CAC are:
        - implementation of effective cooperation in the political,
economic, scientific, technical, environmental, cultural and cultural
in the humanitarian spheres, as well as in ensuring regional
security and stability;
        - Providing mutual support in matters of threat prevention
independence and sovereignty, territorial integrity
Member States;
        - combating regional and transnational crime,
especially with drug trafficking organized by
crime, illegal migration and terrorism;
        - Implementation of concerted efforts in the phased formation
a single economic space;
        - Interaction on the creation of a common infrastructure of the united
transport, communication and energy systems;
        - Implementation of a coordinated policy in the field of border and
customs control;
        - implementation of cooperation in the field of tariff policy;
        - Coordinated and concerted action in
areas of rational and mutually beneficial use of water bodies,
water and energy resources and water management facilities;
        - Promoting the growth of the spiritual potential of the peoples of the states-
CAC members through the development of cooperation in the field of culture, science and
technology, education, sports and tourism;
        - development of cooperation in other areas,
of mutual interest.


 
        Article 3. Membership

        The founding states of the CAC are the Republic of Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyz Republic, Republic of Tajikistan and Republic of Uzbekistan.
        The member states of the CAC are the founding states, and
See also other States that share the objectives, principles of CAC and
assume obligations under this Agreement by
and acceding to it with the consent of all Member States.  True
The treaty shall enter into force for such a State on the date of its receipt
the last written notification of the CAC member State of consent
to such accession.
        A CAC member state has the right to terminate its membership in the CAC
by sending an appropriate message to other CAC member States
written notice no later than 12 months before the date
termination of membership.  Obligations arising during the period of participation in
This Treaty shall bind the States concerned up to their full
Perform.


 
        Article 4. Organs

        To fulfill the goals and objectives of this Treaty within the framework of the CAC
Act:
        - Council of Heads of State and Prime Ministers;
        - Councils of Ministers of Foreign Affairs, Heads of Industry
ministries and departments;
        - Committee of National Coordinators.


 
        Article 5. Council of Heads of State and Prime Ministers

        Council of Heads of State and Prime Ministers (hereinafter referred to as the Council)
considers the most important issues related to common interests
member states, determines the strategy, directions and prospects
development of integration and makes decisions aimed at implementation
for the purposes of this Agreement.
        The Council at the level of the Heads of State meets at least
once a year.
        The Council at the level of prime ministers meets as soon as
necessity and on behalf of the Heads of the CAC Member States.
        The presidency of the Council shall be exercised alternately in accordance with the
Russian alphabet of the name of the member state of CAC within one
Year.
        If necessary, on the proposal of a Member State
CAAC and with the consent of all CAC member States may be convened
Extraordinary meetings of the Council.
        The order of work of the Council shall be determined by the Heads of The Member States
CAC.
        The Board may establish, by its decisions, The Management Boards
line ministries and departments and approve regulations on them.


 
        Article 6. Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs

        The Council of Foreign Ministers is the working body of the CAC.
        The Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs shall consider the following issues:
related to the current activities of the CAC, and consults in
within the framework of the CAC on international issues.
        The Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs shall meet not later than one
a month before the meeting of the Council at the level of the Heads of State.
        Extraordinary meetings of the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
shall be convened on the proposal of at least two Member States and with the consent of
of all Member States.
        Chairmanship of the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
is carried out alternately in the order of the Russian alphabet of the name
CAC member States for one year.
        Functions and working arrangements of the Council of Ministers for Foreign Affairs
is determined by the Regulation, which is approved by a decision of the Council at the level of
Heads of State.


 
        Article 7. Committee of National Coordinators

        The Committee of National Coordinators (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) is
the CAAC body that coordinates and manages the current
CAC activities.
        The National Coordinator shall be appointed and dismissed by the Head
CAC member States.
        The activities of the Committee are carried out in accordance with the
A regulation that is approved by the Council at the level of Heads of State.


 
        Article 8. Financing

        Member States shall bear the costs associated with the
participation of their representatives, as well as experts in the work of the bodies and
CAC events.


 
        Article 9. Observers

        By decision of the Council at the level of heads of state to any state
or an international organization may be granted status
an observer at the CAC, if requested.
        Procedure for granting, suspending and revoking status
Of the observer shall be determined by the Regulations approved by the decision of the Council on
at the level of Heads of State.


 
        Article 10. Capacity

        CAC is used in the territory of each Member State
legal capacity necessary for the realization of its goals and objectives.
        The CAC can establish relations with States and
international organizations and conclude treaties with them.
        The CAC enjoys the rights of a legal entity, exercises its
activities in accordance with this Agreement.


 
        Article 11. Procedure for adoption and execution of decisions

        Decisions in the CAAC bodies are taken by consensus and executed
Member States in accordance with their national
Legislation.
        Monitoring the implementation of the obligations of Member States,
adopted within the framework of the CAC, implemented by the National Coordinators in
within their competence.


 
        Article 12. Privileges and immunities

        The CAC and its officials use in the territories of all
member States with the privileges and immunities which are necessary for
performing the functions and achieving the purposes set forth herein
The contract and agreements in force within the framework of the CAC.
        Scope of privileges and immunities and list of officials
are defined by separate documents.


 
        Article 13. Changes and additions

        In this Treaty by mutual agreement of the Member States
CAC can be amended and supplemented, which are issued
separate protocols that form an integral part of this
Contract.


 
        Article 14. Tongue

        The working language of the CAC is Russian.


 
        Article 15. Sign up

        This Treaty in accordance with Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations
is subject to registration with the United Nations Secretariat.


 
        Article 16. Relation to other treaties

        This Agreement does not affect the rights and obligations
Member States under other international treaties, parties
which they are.


 
        Article 17. Depository

        The functions of the depositary of this Treaty shall be performed by
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan.


 
        Article 18. Duration and entry into force

        This Agreement is concluded for an indefinite period and will
remain in force pending the adoption by Member States of the relevant
decisions to terminate it.
        This Treaty shall be subject to ratification by the Contracting Parties
By the Parties, temporarily applied from the moment of signing and enters into force
from the date of deposit with the depositary of the last instrument of ratification.

        Done at Almaty on 28 February 2002 in one
A genuine copy in Russian language.
        Texts of the Treaty in Kazakh, Kyrgyz, Tajik and
Uzbek languages will be prepared and accepted as equivalent after
exchange of diplomatic notes confirming their conformity with the text
in Russian language.
        The Depositary shall communicate it to each Contracting Party
a certified copy.



        I hereby certify that the attached text is
an authentic copy of the Treaty between the Republic of Kazakhstan and the Kyrgyz Republic
The Republic, the Republic of Tajikistan and the Republic of Uzbekistan
establishment of the Organization "Central Asian Cooperation", adopted by
February 28, 2002 in Almaty.
        The original copy of the above-mentioned Treaty shall be kept in
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kazakhstan.


        Adviser
        International Legal Department
        Ministry of Foreign Affairs
        of the Republic of Kazakhstan N. Sakenov

