FISHERIES AND FISHERIES MANAGEMENT EDERATIONS
ISLEDOVANIE, CH. 2.- M., 1996. S. 52 - 57.
GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
GOVERNMENT OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
AGREEMENT
27.06.93
Nouadhibou
BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION
AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA
ON COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF MARINE FISHERIES
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Islamic Federation
The Republics of Mauritania, hereinafter referred to as "the Parties",
proceeding from the friendly relations existing between the two
Countries
Desiring to develop and improve the legal framework
bilateral cooperation,
being mutually interested in the development of economic
cooperation, especially in the field of marine fisheries,
Bearing in mind the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
Recognizing that, in accordance with the international law of the sea,
The Islamic Republic of Mauritania exercises sovereign rights in
for the purposes of exploration, use, conservation of marine living resources, and
their management in its exclusive economic zone,
stretching 200 nautical miles from its coast, called in
further "zone",
Taking into account the New Economic Policy on
The Political Declaration on Fisheries Development
industry, adopted in April 1987 by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Uzbekistan
The Republic of Mauritania, as well as the creation of a mixed Russian-
Mauritanian Fisheries Society "Mavsov",
Recognizing the need to carry out fishing on the scientific and
rational framework for the conservation of the marine living resources of the zone
and the East Central Atlantic as a whole,
Considering it timely to develop and coordinate relations between the two
countries in the field of scientific research and exchange of scientific data
and other fisheries management information,
Taking into account the construction of relations between the Parties in
the field of marine fisheries on a mutually beneficial and long-term
Basis
Bearing in mind the Agreement between the Government of the Union of Soviet Unions
the Socialist Republics and the Government of the Islamic Republic
Mauritania on cooperation in marine fisheries, 31
January 1981 and its experience gained over the period
practical implementation,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
The parties will cooperate on a mutually beneficial basis and provide
assistance to each other in the development of marine fishing, production,
processing and marketing of fish products, as well as coordinate efforts in
development of scientific research and practical use
marine living resources in waters for which the Islamic
The Republic of Mauritania exercises sovereign rights that
concerns marine living resources.
Article 2
The Russian Side will provide the Mauritanian Side with technical and
Economic assistance in:
development of its fishery industry,
training and advanced training of Moorish seafarers,
the study of marine living resources in waters, with respect to
of which the Islamic Republic of Mauritania exercises sovereign
rights.
The conditions of assistance will be determined annually in
relevant protocols or contracts to be signed
competent organizations of the Parties.
Article 3
Mauritanian Side:
provide fishing, transport (tankers, refrigerators,
tugs, supply vessels) and scientific vessels under the flag of the Russian Federation
Federations (hereinafter referred to as Russian vessels) necessary conditions for conducting
fishing and carrying out fishing operations in the waters, in
in respect of which the Islamic Republic of Mauritania implements
and sovereign rights with respect to marine living resources.
The number of these vessels and the conditions of their work will be periodically
defined in agreed contracts in accordance with article
1 of this Agreement and the minutes of the Mixed Commission,
provided for in Article 6 of this Agreement. These vessels will
to conduct fishing and fishing operations in accordance with
with the current legislation and regulatory acts
Islamic Republic of Mauritania,
will provide preferential conditions for anchoring, supply and
repair of Russian ships in the ports and on the roadsteads of the ports of the Islamic Republic
The Republic of Mauritania,
will provide the Russian Side with preferential conditions for
Implementation of the replacement in the territory of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania
crews of Russian vessels.
Article 4
Practical implementation of the work of the Russian fishery
the fleet in the zone of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania will be carried out
through a mixed Russian-Moorish fishery society
"Mavsov", which is the main instrument of cooperation
Parties in the field of fisheries.
The Russian Side, within the limits of its competence, will
assistance in the development of the program of the society "Mavsov", contributing to
improving the efficiency of fishing vessels operating in
"Mausov". For the same purpose, Russian founders and any new
Russian shareholder "Mavsov" will take the necessary measures
by sending a fleet, specialists within the framework of mutually beneficial
Contracts.
The Mauritanian Party will provide the necessary facilities for
the implementation of this programme, in particular, it will enable the implementation of the Programme.
exceptionally to the vessels chartered by the Mavs, to conduct
operations for the supply and transshipment of its products in the area that
will be equal in rights to operations that are carried out under
putting fishing vessels in port.
The parties will contribute to the development of the founders' initiative
Mavs society in what will concern the expansion in its
within the framework of mutually beneficial cooperation, in particular, in the field of
fishing, processing of living marine resources, in the provision of
Russian vessels of various services in Moorish ports and in
the use of Russian crews on Moorish vessels as well as
the use of Moorish crews on Russian ships.
Article 5
The Parties undertake to cooperate in the implementation of scientific
fisheries research directly and/or through
relevant international organizations for the purpose of conservation and
optimal use of the marine living resources of the zone.
Scientists and specialists from the Parties will consult on
practical issues of such research and exchange
scientific and field information.
Article 6
The parties create a Russian-Mauritanian mixed commission on
Fisheries to monitor progress
of this Agreement. The regular sessions of the Mixed Commission will be
take place once a year alternately in Mauritania and Russia, and
Extraordinary - at any time at the request of one of the Parties.
The results of the work of the Mixed Commission shall be formalized by a protocol.
Article 7
In order to facilitate the implementation of the provisions of this Agreement and
coordination between the relevant organizations of the Parties in
development of mutually beneficial cooperation in the field of fisheries
The Russian Side will continue the activities of the Representative Office
Committee of the Russian Federation on Fisheries in the Islamic Republic
Republic of Mauritania.
Article 8
The Russian Side will take all necessary measures to
ensuring compliance by Russian courts with the provisions of this
Agreements, as well as Mauritanian fisheries legislation and
regulations, especially in the field of fisheries.
Mauritanian competent organizations in advance and in
notify the Russian Party in writing of changes in
the legislation and all new regulations of Mauritania,
which may be relevant to the implementation of fisheries
Activities. If, in order to conserve marine living resources
The Mauritanian Party shall take regulatory measures, in
as a result of which normal fishing will be disrupted
activities, then they should not be discriminatory in nature
in respect of Russian vessels in comparison with the vessels of third countries,
conducting the same kind of fishery. In this case, the
consultations of the Parties to determine appropriate reparation
losses in the conduct of fishing. None of this should be damaging.
the provisions of special agreements concluded between
developing countries of the geographical region, including
mutual fisheries agreements.
Article 9
1. In case of arrest or detention of a Russian vessel
The Mauritanian Side shall, through diplomatic channels, immediately
notifies the Russian Party thereof.
2. Any detained Russian vessel that has a permit
for fishing in the zone, may not be confiscated and shall be released
together with the crew immediately after making a reasonable deposit
or other collateral.
Article 10
1. In the event of a dispute between the Parties regarding
the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement, or
The Parties shall resolve this dispute on the basis of the agreements concluded on the basis of it
through consultations with a view to finding a solution as soon as possible.
2. Consultations pursuant to this Article shall be held
immediately at the request of any Party.
Article 11
Nothing in this Agreement shall be construed as
prejudicial to bilateral and multilateral agreements,
concluded by each of the Parties on matters of international maritime
rights.
Article 12
If one party has sufficient grounds to believe,
that the other Party is not in compliance with its obligations under this
To the agreement, she can denounce it by sending a written
notification of this to the other Party. This Agreement
terminates three months after receipt of such
Notifications.
Article 13
This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of exchange
diplomatic documents notifying of its approval, or
ratification of each of the Parties, and will be valid until December 31
1996.
However, in the event of expiration of this Agreement
and non-compliance with the Protocols arising from it or its Protocols
obligations in full, these obligations shall remain in force until
their full implementation. Except in the case of denunciation, the present
The agreement will be extended for further three-year periods
by exchanging letters 3 months before the expiration of each three-year period
Period.
Done at Nouadhibou, on 27 June 1993, in three copies each
in Russian, French and Arabic, all three texts
have the same force.
(Signatures)
