 amendments to paragraphs 6, 7(a) and 10 of the schedule to the international convention for the regulation of whaling of 2 december 1946 source: paragraph 6. at the end of the paragraph add the following words: "provided that in each of the pelagic whaling seasons 1949/50 and 1950/51 a maximum of 1,250 humpback whales may be taken in these waters." paragraph 7(a) omit words "15 december to 1 april" in fourth line and insert the words "22 december to 7 april". [note. this amendment involves a consequential amendment in paragraph 8(d) where the words "7 april" should be substituted for "1 april".] paragraph 10 delete and in place insert the following new paragraph 10: "10. (a) it is forbidden to use a land station under the jurisdiction of a contracting government, and whale catchers attached to such land station, for the purpose of taking or treating baleen whales except as permitted by the contracting government in accordance with sub-paragraph (b) of this paragraph. (b) each contracting government shall declare for all land stations under its jurisdiction, and whale catchers attached to such land stations, one open season during which the taking or treating of baleen whales shall be permitted. such open season shall be for a period of not more than six consecutive months in any period of twelve months and shall apply to all land stations under the jurisdiction of a contracting government; provided that a separate open season may be declared for any land station used for the taking or treating of baleen whales which is more than 1,000 miles from the nearest land station used for the taking or treating of baleen whales under the jurisdiction of the same contracting government. (c) notwithstanding the prohibition in sub-paragraph (a) of this paragraph, the treatment of whales which have been taken during an open season may be completed after the end of such open season. (d) the prohibitions contained in this paragraph shall apply to all land stations as defined in article ii of the whaling convention of 1946 and to all factory ships which are subject to the regulations governing the operation of land stations under the provisions of paragraph 17 of this schedule."
