ANNEX III TO THE PROTOCOL ON ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION TO
THE ANTARCTIC TREATY
WASTE DISPOSAL AND WASTE MANAGEMENT
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS
1. This Annex shall apply to activities undertaken in the Antarctic Treaty area
pursuant to scientific research programmes, tourism and all other governmental and nongovernmental
activities in the Antarctic Treaty area for which advance notice is required
under Article VII (5) of the Antarctic Treaty, including associated logistic support
activities.
2. The amount of wastes produced or disposed of in the Antarctic Treaty area shall
be reduced as far as practicable so as to minimise impact on the Antarctic environment
and to minimise interference with the natural values of Antarctica, with scientific
research and with other uses of Antarctica which are consistent with the Antarctic Treaty.
3. Waste storage, disposal and removal from the Antarctic Treaty area, as well as
recycling and source reduction, shall be essential considerations in the planning and
conduct of activities in the Antarctic Treaty area.
4. Wastes removed from the Antarctic Treaty area shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, be returned to the country from which the activities generating the waste
were organized or to any other country in which arrangements have been made for the
disposal of such wastes in accordance with relevant international agreements.
5. Past and present waste disposal sites on land and abandoned work sites of
Antarctic activities shall be cleaned up by the generator of such wastes and the user of
such sites. This obligation shall not be interpreted as requiring:
(a) the removal of any structure designated as a historic site or monument; or
(b) the removal of any structure or waste material in circumstances where the
removal by any practical option would result in greater adverse environmental
impact than leaving the structure or waste material in its existing location.
ARTICLE 2
WASTE DISPOSAL BY REMOVAL FROM THE ANTARCTIC TREATY AREA
1. The following wastes, if generated after entry into force of this Annex, shall be
removed from the Antarctic Treaty area by the generator of such wastes:
(a) radio-active materials;
(b) electrical batteries;
(c) fuel, both liquid and solid;
(d) wastes containing harmful levels of heavy metals or acutely toxic or harmful
persistent compounds;
(e) poly-vinyl chloride (PVC), polyurethane foam, polystyrene foam, rubber and
lubricating oils, treated timbers and other products which contain additives that
could produce harmful emissions if incinerated;
(f) all other plastic wastes, except low density polyethylene containers (such as
bags for storing wastes), provided that such containers shall be incinerated in
accordance with Article 3 (1);
(g) fuel drums; and
(h) other solid, non-combustible wastes;
provided that the obligation to remove drums and solid non-combustible wastes
contained in subparagraphs (g) and (h) above shall not apply in circumstances where the
removal of such wastes by any practical option would result in greater adverse
environmental impact than leaving them in their existing locations.
2. Liquid wastes which are not covered by paragraph 1 above and sewage and
domestic liquid wastes, shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be removed from the
Antarctic Treaty area by the generator of such wastes.
3. The following wastes shall be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area by the
generator of such wastes, unless incinerated, autoclaved or otherwise treated to be made
sterile:
(a) residues of carcasses of imported animals;
(b) laboratory culture of micro-organisms and plant pathogens; and
(c) introduced avian products.
ARTICLE 3
WASTE DISPOSAL BY INCINERATION
1. Subject to paragraph 2 below, combustible wastes, other than those referred to in
Article 2 (1), which are not removed from the Antarctic Treaty area shall be burnt in
incinerators which to the maximum extent practicable reduce harmful emissions. Any
emission standards and equipment guidelines which may be recommended by, inter alia,
the Committee and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research shall be taken into
account. The solid residue of such incineration shall be removed from the Antarctic
Treaty area.
2. All open burning of wastes shall be phased out as soon as practicable, but no later
than the end of the 1998/1999 season. Pending the completion of such phase-out, when it
is necessary to dispose of wastes by open burning, allowance shall be made for the wind
direction and speed and the type of wastes to be burnt to limit particulate deposition and
to avoid such deposition over areas of special biological, scientific, historic, aesthetic or
wilderness significance including, in particular, areas accorded protection under the
Antarctic Treaty.
ARTICLE 4
OTHER WASTE DISPOSAL ON LAND
1. Wastes not removed or disposed of in accordance with Articles 2 and 3 shall not
be disposed of onto ice-free areas or into fresh water systems.
2. Sewage, domestic liquid wastes and other liquid wastes not removed from the
Antarctic Treaty area in accordance with Article 2, shall, to the maximum extent
practicable, not be disposed of onto sea ice, ice shelves or the grounded ice-sheet,
provided that such wastes which are generated by stations located inland on ice shelves or
on the grounded ice-sheet may be disposed of in deep ice pits where such disposal is the
only practicable option. Such pits shall not be located on known ice-flow lines which
terminate at ice-free areas or in areas of high ablation.
3. Wastes generated at field camps shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be
removed by the generator of such wastes to supporting stations or ships for disposal in
accordance with this Annex.
ARTICLE 5
DISPOSAL OF WASTE IN THE SEA
1. Sewage and domestic liquid wastes may be discharged directly into the sea,
taking into account the assimilative capacity of the receiving marine environment and
provided that:
(a) such discharge is located, wherever practicable, where conditions exist for
initial dilution and rapid dispersal; and
(b) large quantities of such wastes (generated in a station where the average weekly
occupancy over the austral summer is approximately 30 individuals or more)
shall be treated at least by maceration.
2. The by-product of sewage treatment by the Rotary Biological Contacter process
or similar processes may be disposed of into the sea provided that such disposal does not
adversely affect the local environment, and provided also that any such disposal at sea
shall be in accordance with Annex IV to the Protocol.
ARTICLE 6
STORAGE OF WASTE
All wastes to be removed from the Antarctic Treaty area, or otherwise disposed of, shall
be stored in such a way as to prevent their dispersal into the environment.
ARTICLE 7
PROHIBITED PRODUCTS
No polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), non-sterile soil, polystyrene beads, chips or similar
forms of packaging, or pesticides (other than those required for scientific, medical or
hygiene purposes) shall be introduced onto land or ice shelves or into water in the
Antarctic Treaty area.
ARTICLE 8
WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANNING
1. Each Party which itself conducts activities in the Antarctic Treaty area shall, in
respect of those activities, establish a waste disposal classification system as a basis for
recording wastes and to facilitate studies aimed at evaluating the environmental impacts
of scientific activity and associated logistic support. To that end, wastes produced shall
be classified as:
(a) sewage and domestic liquid wastes (Group 1);
(b) other liquid wastes and chemicals, including fuels and lubricants (Group 2);
(c) solids to be combusted (Group 3);
(d) other solid wastes (Group 4); and
(e) radioactive material (Group 5).
2. In order to reduce further the impact of waste on the Antarctic environment, each
such Party shall prepare and annually review and update its waste management plans
(including waste reduction, storage and disposal), specifying for each fixed site, for field
camps generally, and for each ship (other than small boats that are part of the operations
of fixed sites or of ships and taking into account existing management plans for ships):
(a) programmes for cleaning up existing waste disposal sites and abandoned work
sites;
(b) current and planned waste management arrangements, including final disposal;
(c) current and planned arrangements for analysing the environmental effects of
waste and waste management; and
(d) other efforts to minimise any environmental effects of wastes and waste
management.
3. Each such Party shall, as far as is practicable, also prepare an inventory of
locations of past activities (such as traverses, field depots, field bases, crashed aircraft)
before the information is lost, so that such locations can be taken into account in planning
future scientific programmes (such as snow chemistry, pollutants in lichens or ice core
drilling).
ARTICLE 9
CIRCULATION AND REVIEW OF WASTE MANAGEMENT PLANS
1. The waste management plans prepared in accordance with Article 8, reports on
their implementation, and the inventories referred to in Article 8 (3), shall be included in
the annual exchanges of information in accordance with Articles III and VII of the
Antarctic Treaty and related Recommendations under Article IX of the Antarctic Treaty.
2. Each Party shall send copies of its waste management plans, and reports on their
implementation and review, to the Committee.
3. The Committee may review waste management plans and reports thereon and
may offer comments, including suggestions for minimising impacts and modifications
and improvement to the plans, for the consideration of the Parties.
4. The Parties may exchange information and provide advice on, inter alia, available
low waste technologies, reconversion of existing installations, special requirements for
effluents, and appropriate disposal and discharge methods.
ARTICLE 10
MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Each Party shall:
(a) designate a waste management official to develop and monitor waste
management plans; in the field, this responsibility shall be delegated to an
appropriate person at each site;
(b) ensure that members of its expeditions receive training designed to limit the
impact of its operations on the Antarctic environment and to inform them of
requirements of this Annex; and
(c) discourage the use of poly-vinyl chloride (PVC) products and ensure that its
expeditions to the Antarctic Treaty are advised of any PVC products they may
introduce into that area in order that these products may be removed
subsequently in accordance with this Annex.
ARTICLE 11
REVIEW
This Annex shall be subject to regular review in order to ensure that it is updated to
reflect improvement in waste disposal technology and procedures and to ensure thereby
maximum protection of the Antarctic environment.
ARTICLE 12
CASES OF EMERGENCY
1. This Annex shall not apply in cases of emergency relating to the safety of human
life or of ships, aircraft or equipment and facilities of high value or the protection of the
environment.
2. Notice of activities undertaken in cases of emergency shall be circulated
immediately to all Parties and to the Committee.
ARTICLE 13
AMENDMENT OR MODIFICATION
1. This Annex may be amended or modified by a measure adopted in accordance
with Article IX (1) of the Antarctic Treaty. Unless the measure specifies otherwise, the
amendment or modification shall be deemed to have been approved, and shall become
effective, one year after the close of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting at which
it was adopted, unless one or more of the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties notifies
the Depositary, within that time period, that it wishes an extension of that period or that it
is unable to approve the amendment.
2. Any amendment or modification of this Annex which becomes effective in
accordance with paragraph 1 above shall thereafter become effective as to any other Party
when notice of approval by it has been received by the Depositary.
