NOTE I
The American Embassy to the Canadian Department of External
Affairs
Note No. 364
The Embassy of the United States of America presents its compliments to
the Department of External Affairs and has the honor to ref er to the discussions
between representatives of the Department of the Army of the United States and
the Government of Manitoba concerning their desire to cooperate in the field of
flood control by constructing a joint ring levee to protect the town of Emerson,
Manitoba, and the unicorporated village of Noyes, Minnesota.
The Embassy has the further honor to propose that construction of the joint
ring levee project shall proceed in accordance with the attached plan, and that
it consist of three segments: upgrading the levee around part of the town of
Emerson; upgrading the levee around part of the village of Noyes; and construction
of a levee adjacent and parallel to the international boundary along the
United States' side of the international boundary, hereinafter referred to as the
international levee segment, which will attach to the west end of the Emerson
levee on its west side and the Noyes levee on its east side.
If the foregoing is acceptable to the Government of Canada, the Embassy
has the honor to propose that this note, together with the attached plan, and the
Government of Canada's reply shall constitute an agreement for construction of
this project between our two governments which shall enter into force on the
date of the Government of Canada's reply.
The Embassy of the United States of America avails itself of this opportunity
to renew to the Department of External Affairs the assurances of its highest
consideration.
Attachment:
Joint Ring Levee Project Plan
Embassy of the United States of America
Ottawa, August 29, 1988
Plan for the Construction of a Joint Ring Levee Project to
Provide Aood Protection to the Town of Emerson, Manitoba
and the Unincorporated Village of Noyes, Minnesota
Article I
Obligations of the Province of Manitoba
The Province of Manitoba shall acquire the lands for and construct and
maintain a levee at Emerson, Manitoba, at an elevation which shall accommodate
the flows of the Red River of the North at a discharge rate of 122,000 cubic
feet per second (3,455 cubic meters per second) plus three feet of freeboard with
adequate interior flood control facilities. The levee and interior flood control
facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with professional
engineering standards of Manitoba. Construction of this levee shall be completed
by December 31, 1989.
The Province of Manitoba shall reimburse the Department of the Army of
the United States for all project costs of the International Levee segment of the
joint ring levee which will be constructed under private competitive contract
awarded and administered by the Department of the Army's Corps of Engineers.
Reimbursable costs shall include expenses of engineering and design, necessary
utility relocations, fill for the levee, physical construction (except for costs of
real estate interests necessary for the International Levee segment, which shall
be paid by St. Vincent Township, Minnesota), and supervision and administration
costs, including overhead costs associated with construction.
The Province of Manitoba agrees to pay St. Vincent Township, Minnesota,
the costs of routine maintenance of the International Levee segment. In liquidation
of this obligation, the Province of Manitoba shall pay St. Vincent Township
the sum of $17,000 (United States dollars) on or before March 31, 1990, which
sum shall be invested by St. Vincent Township, Minnesota, and allocated for the
purpose of· the routine maintenance of the International Levee segment. Costs of
repair due to erosion, reconstruction, rehabilitation or other costs in excess of
routine maintenance costs are not considered to be part of the routine maintenance
of the International Levee segment.
Article II
Obligations of the Department of the Anny of the United States
The Department of the Anny acting through its Corps of Engineers shall,
on lands provided by St. Vincent Township, Minnesota, construct a levee at
Noyes, Minnesota at an elevation which shall accommodate the flows of the Red
River of the North at a discharge rate of 122,000 cubic feet per second (3,455
cubic meters per second), plus three feet of freeboard with adequate interior
flood control facilities.
The Department of the Army shall, on lands provided by St. Vincent Township,
Minnesota, construct the International Levee segment of the joint ring levee
under private competitive contract awarded and administered by the Department
of the Anny's Corps of Engineers at an elevation which will accommodate the
flows of the Red River of the North at a discharge rate of 122,000 cubic feet
per second (3,455 cubic meters per second), plus three feet of freeboard with
adequate interior flood control facilities.
Construction of the International Levee segment and the levee at Noyes
shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications for Flood Control on
the Red River of the North, Noyes, Minnesota, prepared by the St. Paul District,
Corps of Engineers, dated July 1988, and shall be completed by December 3 I,
1989. Such construction shall be subject to the laws, regulations, and policies
of the United States.
St. Vincent Township, Minnesota, shall operate, maintain, replace, and
rehabilitate the International Levee segment and the levee at Noyes upon completion
of construction in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Department
of the Anny and as required under Public Law 99-662. The Department of the
Anny shall ensure that St. Vincent Township complies with such regulations
through annual maintenance inspections.
The Department of the Anny of the United States shall keep detailed and
accurate accounts and records of all reimbursable expenditures made by the
Corps of Engineers to construct the International Levee segment of the joint ring
levee. The United States Department of the Anny shall maintain such accounts
and records for at least three years following the construction of the International
Levee segment. The Corps of Engineers shall make the records of the expenditures
for the International Levee segment available for inspection and audit by
officials from the Province of Manitoba after reasonable notice to the Corps of
Engineers.
Article III
Availability of Funds and Manpower
All activities to be carried out under this Plan shall be subject to the funds
and manpower available to the United States Department of the Army and the
Province of Manitoba in each fiscal year in which this Plan is in effect.
Article IV
Payment Procedures
The United States Department of the Army's Corps of Engineers shall submit
monthly invoices to the Province of Manitoba for the cost of materials and
work performed on the International Levee segment.
Payments made by the Province of Manitoba to the Department of the Army
or St. Vincent Township shall be made in United States dollars within thirty days
after receipt of invoices from the United States.
Any amount payable by the Province of Manitoba to the Department of the
Army or St. Vincent Township with respect to costs or contributions incurred
under this Plan shall be paid within thirty days of receipt of the invoice. Undisputed
amounts due that are not paid within thirty days shall accrue interest as
prescribed by the U.S. Treasury Department beginning on the thirty-first day following
receipt of the bill.
Article V
Disputes
The Governments of Canada and the United States shall seek to resolve differences
arising under this Plan in good faith through negotiation or other forms
of dispute resolution mutually acceptable to them.
Article VI
/11de11mificatio11
The Department of the Army of the United States shall hold and save the
Province of Manitoba free and harmless from all damages arising from the
construction and operation of the portions of the flood control project that are
constructed by the Department of the Anny's Corps of Engineers, except for any
damages that may arise due to the sole fault .or negligence of the Province of
Manitoba or contractors of the Province of Manitoba.
The Province of Manitoba shall hold and save the Depanment ot the Anny
and its Corps of Engineers free and hannless from all damages arising from the
construction and operation of the portions of the flood control project that are
constructed or maintained by the Government of Manitoba, except for any damages
that may arise due to the sole fault or negligence of the Department of the
Army of the United States or contractors of the Department of the Anny of the
United States.
Article VII
Property Rights
All information, intellectual property, patents, designs, data, analyses of data
generated by any activity under this Plan shall be freely and exclusively
exchanged between the Province of Manitoba and the Department of the Anny
of the United States.
Article VIII
Public Announcement
Any public announcement relating to this Plan as well as any official opening
ceremonies for the activities contemplated by this Plan shall be arranged
jointly by the Province of Manitoba and the Department of the Anny of the
United States.
NOTE II
Canadian Embassy Ambassade du Canada
Note No. 286
The Embassy of Canada presents its compliments to the Department of State
of the United States of America and has the honour to refer to Note No. 364
of August 29, 1988, received from the Embassy of the United States in Ottawa,
Canada.
The Embassy of Canada is pleased to inform the Department of State that
the proposals outlined in the Embassy's Note are acceptable to the Government
of Canada and to confirm that the Embassy's Note, together with the attached
Plan, and this reply, which is equally authentic in English and French, shall constitute
an Agreement for construction of the joint ring levee project between our
two Governments which shall enter into force on the date of this reply.
The Embassy of Canada avails itself of this opportunity to renew to the
Department of State of the United States of America the assurances of its highest
consideration.
WASHINGTON, D.C.
August 30, 1988.
