Constitution of the Association of Natural Rubber Produc ing Countries. Adopted at London on 21 May 1968
The Constitution and certified statements were registered by Malaysia on 15 June 1977.
A. NAME AND MEMBERSHIP
1. The name of the Association is the Association of Natural Rubber Produc ing Countries.
2. Membership of the Association shall be open to Governments of countries producing natural rubber.
B. OBJECTIVES
3. The objectives of the Association shall be carried out to the mutual advan tage of all Members. These objectives are:
(a) to bring about co-ordination in the production and marketing of natural rubber;
(b) to promote technical co-operation amongst Members;
(c) to bring about fair and stable prices for natural rubber.
C. FUNCTIONS
4. In furtherance of the above objectives, the Association shall:
(a) make studIes of the world rubb position and examine the short and long-term problems facing the natural rubber industry;
(b) promote research and development in production, marketing and consumption of natural rubber;
(c) set up such institutional arrangements as may be considered necessary; (d) co-operate with other appropriate international organisations;
(e) make recommendations to Members whenever necessary.
D. FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERS
5. Members shall contribute to the funds of the Association on the following basis:
(a) Each Member shall pay a basic subscription equivalent to US$5,000 per annum.
Came into force in re of the following States on 8 April 1970, i.e., when four Governments of countries pro ducing natural rubber had deposited their instrument of approval, acceptance or accession with the Government of Malaysia, in accordance with article 21
(b) In the event of the basic subscription under Clause (a) above falling short of the total required for the Annual Budget, the balance shall be paid by each Member in proportion to its production* of NR in the calendar year two years preceding the Association’s Budget Year in question.*
6. Any Member whose subscription under Article 5 is in arrears for two suc cessive years shall, unless the Association otherwise decides, cease to enjoy privileges of membership until arrears and contributions for the current year have been paid.
7. All sums due from Members shall be paid to the Association in convertible currencies.
8. The Annual Budget shall be approved by the Association not less than three months before the commencement of the ensuing Budget Year. The Budget Year shall correspond to the calendar year.
E. ORGANISATION AND MANAGEMENT
9. The Association shall function through its Assembly, its Executive Com mittee and its Secretariat.
10. The seat of the Association shall be in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, unless the Assembly otherwise decided.
11. (a) The Supreme Body of the Association shall be the Assembly con sisting of all Members of the Association.
(b) Each Member shall be represented at the Assembly by a representative who may be accompanied by one or more Alternates and/or Advisors.
(c) The Assembly shall elect a Chairman and a first and second Vice-Chairman and shall hold office between regular annual sessions of the Assembly.
(d) The Assembly shall hold regular sessions once a year. The venue and date of the regular session shall be decided by the Assembly.
(e) Special Sessions of the Assembly may be convened by the Executive Com mittee or at the request of at least four Members. The Executive Committee shall decide the venue and date of such special sessions.
12. The quorum for any meeting of the Assembly shall be the presence of a majority of Members.
F. VOTING
13. (a) Each Member shall have one yote.
(b) All decisions shall be determined by a majority of Members voting.
(c) No decisions shall be effective unless the Members voting in its favour together represent not less than half of the total annual Members’ production** of natural rubber in the calendar year, two years preceding, as officially recognized by the Association.’
* In the case of Singapore, the Association in consultation with the Government of Singapore, shall determine the amount of contribution under this Clause.
‘ In the case of Singapore, voting will be determined in proportion to its production as assessed under Article 5(b).
0. EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
14. The Executive Committee shall consist of all Members of the Association. Each Member shall be represented by a representative who may be accompanied by one or more Alternates and/or Advisors. The quorum for any Meeting of the Exec utive Committee shall be the presence of four Members.
15. The Executive Committee shall exercise the functions of the Association between annual regular sessions of the Assembly.
16. The Executive Committee shall be empowered to determine procedural matters and shall make such rules as may be necessary for the proper functioning of the Secretariat.
H. SECRETARY-GENERAL
17. (a) The Assembly shall appoint a Secretary-General for the Association for such period as it may determine.
(b) The Secretary-General shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Associa tion who shall be the Head of the Secretariat and who shall be responsible to the Assembly for carrying out the functions of the Association.
I. FUNCTIONS OF THE SECRETARIAT
18. The Functions of the Secretariat shall be:
(a) to provide the necessary link between Members;
(b) to make preparations for all Meetings of the Assembly and Executive Committee and to service such Meetings;
(c) to maintain liaison and to consult with International Organizations whose work is of interest to the Association;
(d) to make such studies as specified in Article 4 (a);
(e) to carry out the directives of the Association.
19. The Secretariat shall operate within the policies laid down by the Associa tion.
20. Unless otherwise directed by the Member concerned, information furnished to the Secretariat shall be utilized in any manner that the Secretariat deems fit.
J. GENERAL PROVISIONS
21. The Constitution of the Association shall come into force definitely on such date as when at least four Governments of countries producing natural rubber have deposited instruments [ approval], acceptance or accession.
Thereafter the Government of any country producing natural rubber which ratifies the Constitution of the Association and has deposited its instrument of ap proval, acceptance or accession shall become a Member of the Association.
22. Taking into account Article 10 regarding the seat of the Association, the instruments as mentioned in Article 21 shall be deposited with the Government of Malaysia.
23. Any Member may withdraw from the Association at any time by giving written notice of its intention to withdraw to the Secretary-General and such withdrawal shall become effective ninety days after receipt of such notice.
24. The Assembly may amend the Constitution of the Association. Notice of any amendment shall be circulated by the Secretary-General to all Members not less than thirty days prior to the Meeting of the Assembly. Any amendment approved by the Assembly shall take effect one hundred days after its approval.
