constitution of the european commission for the control of foot and mouth diseasesource: preamble:the contracting governments, having regard to the urgent necessity of preventing the recurrence of the heavy losses to european agriculture caused by the repeated outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease, hereby establish, within the framework of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations, a commission to be known as the european commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease, whose object shall be to promote national and international action with respect to preventive and control measures against foot-and-mouth disease in europe ARTICLE i:membership:1. membership in the european commission for the control of foot-and-mouth disease (hereinafter referred to as "the commission") shall be open to such european member nations of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations, to such states participating as members in the regional conference for europe of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations and serviced by the regional office for europe of the food and agriculture organization of the united nations and to such european member nations of the international office of epizootics that are members of the united nations, as accept this constitution in accordance with the provisions of article xv. the commission may, by a two-thirds majority of the membership of the commission, admit to membership such other european states that are members of the united nations, any of its specialized agencies or the international atomic energy agency as have submitted an application for membership and a declaration made in a formal instrument that they accept the obligations of this constitution as in force at the time of admission.2. the food and agriculture organization of the united nations (hereinafter referred to as "the organization"), the international office of epizootics (hereinafter referred to as "the office"), the european community, and the organization for economic cooperation and development shall have the right to be represented at all sessions of the commission and its committees, but their representatives shall not have the right to vote ARTICLE ii:obligations of members regarding national policies and international cooperation for the control of foot-and-mouth disease:1. members undertake to control foot-and-mouth disease with a view to its ultimate eradication by the institution of suitable quarantine and sanitary measures and by one or more of the following methods:a slaughter policy;slaughter together with vaccination;maintenance of totally immune cattle population by vaccination; other susceptible livestock may be vaccinated.vaccination in zones surrounding outbreaks.methods adopted shall be rigorously carried out.2. members adopting policy 2 or 4 undertake to have available a supply of vaccine or antigen for vaccine production sufficient to ensure adequate protection against the disease in case the spread of the disease can not be controlled exclusively by sanitary measures. each member shall collaborate with and assist other members in all concerted measures for the control of foot-and-mouth disease and in particular in the supply of vaccine or antigen for vaccine production where necessary. the quantities of antigen and vaccine to be stored for national and international use shall be determined by members in the light of the findings of the commission and the advice of the office.3. members shall make such arrangements for the typing of virus from outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease as may be required by the commission and shall immediately notify the commission and the office of the results of such typing.4. members shall make arrangements for the rapid dispatch of new isolates to the fao designated world reference laboratory for further characterization.5. members undertake to provide the commission with any information which it may need to carry out its functions. in particular, members shall immediately report to the commission and to the office an
  t such times and places as are in accordance with the objectives for which they were established.3. membership in such committees may be open to all members of the commission or consist of selected members of the commission or of individuals appointed in their personal capacity because of their competence in technical matters, as determined by the commission. on proposal of the chairman, observers may be invited to participate in the meetings of the special and standing committees.4. members of the committees shall be appointed at the regular session of the commission and each committee shall elect its own chairman ARTICLE viiirules and regulations:subject to the provisions of this constitution, the commission may, by a majority of two-thirds of its membership, adopt and amend its own rules of procedure and financial regulations, which shall be in conformity with the general rules and financial regulations of the organization. the rules of the commission and any amendments thereto shall come into force upon approval by the director-general of the organization, the financial regulations and amendments thereto being subject to confirmation by the council of the organization ARTICLE ixobservers:1. any member nation of the organization that is not a member of the commission and any associate member may be invited to, or, upon its request, be represented by an observer at sessions of the commission. it may submit memoranda and participate without vote in the discussions.2. states which, while not members of the commission nor members or associate members of the organization, are members of the united nations, any of its specialized agencies or the international atomic energy agency may, upon request and subject to the concurrence of the commission through its chairman and to the provisions relating to the granting of observer status to nations adopted by the conference of the organization, be invited to attend in an observer capacity sessions of the commission.3. participation of international organizations in the work of the commission and the relations between the commission and such organizations shall be governed by the relevant provisions of the constitution and the general rules of the organization as well as by the rules on relations with international organizations adopted by the conference or council of the organization. all such relations shall be dealt with by the director-general of the organization. the relations between the organization and the office are governed by such agreement between the organization and the office as may be in force ARTICLE xexecutive committee:1. an executive committee shall be established and shall be composed of the chairman, two vice-chairmen of the commission and five delegates of members selected by the commission at the end of its regular session. the chairman of the commission shall be the chairman of the executive committee.2. members of the executive committee shall hold office until the end of the next regular session without prejudice to the right of re-election.3. if a vacancy occurs in the executive committee before the expiration of the term of appointment, the committee may request a member of the commission to appoint a representative to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the term.4. the executive committee shall meet at least twice between any two successive regular sessions of the commission.5. the secretary of the commission shall act as secretary to the executive committee ARTICLE xifunctions of the executive committee:the executive committee shall:1. make proposals to the commission concerning policy matters and the programme of activities;2. implement the policies and programmes approved by the commission;/3. submit to the commission the draft programme and administrative budget, and the accounts for the past biennium;4. prepare the report on the activities of the commission during the past biennium for approval by the commission and transmission to the director-general of the organization;5. undertake such other duties as the commission may delegate to it, i
  he director-general shall inform each of the members of the commission of the approval of any application for membership.3. acceptance of the constitution may be made subject to reservations. the director-general of the organization shall notify forthwith all members of the commission of the receipt of any application for membership or any instrument of acceptance of the constitution either of which contains a reservation. a reservation shall become effective only upon unanimous approval by the members of the commission. the members of the commission not having replied within three months from the date of the notification by the director-general of the reservation shall be deemed to have accepted the reservation. failing unanimous approval by the members of the commission of a reservation, the nation making the reservation shall not become a party to this constitution ARTICLE xviwithdrawal:1. any member may withdraw from the commission at any time after the expiration of one year from the date on which its acceptance took effect or from the date on which the constitution entered into force, whichever is the later, by giving written notice of withdrawal to the director-general of the organization who shall forthwith inform all members of the commission. the withdrawal shall become effective one year from the date of receipt of the notification of withdrawal.2. non-payment of two consecutive annual contributions shall be regarded as implying withdrawal of the defaulting member from the commission.3. any member of the commission withdrawing from the organization of the office, when such withdrawal results in this nation no longer being a member of either of these two agencies, shall be deemed to have withdrawn simultaneously from the commission ARTICLE xviisettlement of disputes:1. if there is any dispute regarding the interpretation or application of this constitution, the member or members concerned may request the director-general of the organization to appoint a committee to consider the question in dispute.2. the director-general shall there-upon, after consultation with the members concerned, appoint a committee of experts which shall include representatives of those members. this committee shall consider the question in dispute, taking into account all documents and other forms of evidence submitted by the members concerned. this committee shall submit a report to the director-general of the organization who shall transmit it to the members concerned and to the other members of the commission.3. the members of the commission agree that the recommendations of such a committee, while not binding in character, will become the basis for renewed consideration by the members concerned of the matter out of which the disagreement arose.4. the members concerned shall share equally the expenses of the experts ARTICLE xviiitermination:1. this constitution shall be terminated by a decision of the commission taken by a three-fourths majority of the membership of the commission. it shall automatically be terminated should membership, as a result of withdrawals, comprise fewer than six nations.2. on termination of the constitution all assets of the commission shall be liquidated by the director-general of the organization and after settlement of all liabilities the balance shall be distributed proportionally amongst members on the basis of the scale of contributions in force at the time. nations whose contributions are in arrears fro two consecutive years and hence deemed to have withdrawn in conformity with article xvi (2) shall not be entitled to a share of the assets ARTICLE xixentry into force:1. this constitution shall enter into force upon receipt by the director-general of the organization of notifications of acceptance from six member nations of the organization or of the office, providing that their contributions represent in the aggregate not less than 30 percent of the administrative budget provided for in article xiii (1).2. the director-general shall notify all nations having deposited notifications of acceptance o
  means all the persons appointed by a member to attend a session of the commission, that is to say its delegate and his alternate, experts and advisers.2. the credentials of delegates and alternates and the names of other persons in their delegations and of the observers from participating nations and international organizations shall, insofar as possible, be deposited with the secretary of the commission not later than the opening day of each session of the commission. the secretary shall examine the credentials and report thereon to the commission.rule ivsecretariatthe staff of the secretariat 
  of the commission shall be appointed in accordance with article xii of the constitution and subject to the provisions of that article. it shall be the duty of the secretariat to receive, translate into the working languages of the commission and circulate documents, reports and resolutions of the commission and its committees, to prepare the records of their proceedings and to perform such other work as the commission or any of its committees may require.rule vattendance at plenary meetings of the commission1. plenary meetings of the commission shall be open to attendance by all delegations and by observers from participating nations and international organizations and such members of the staff of the organization as the director-general may designate. plenary meetings of the commission shall be held in public unless the commission decides otherwise.2. subject to any decision of the commission the secretary shall make arrangements for the admission of the public and of representatives of the press and other information agencies, to plenary meetings of the commission.rule vipowers and duties of chairman and vice-chairmen of the commission1. in addition to exercising such powers as are conferred upon him elsewhere by these rules, the chairman shall declare the opening and closing of each plenary meeting of the session. he shall direct the discussion in plenary meetings and at such meetings ensure observance of these rules, accord the right to speak, put questions, and announce decisions. he shall rule on points of order, and, subject to these rules, shall have complete control over the proceedings at any meetings. he may, in the course of the discussion of an item, propose to the commission the limitation of the time to be allowed to speakers, the number of times each delegation may speak on any question, the closure of the list of speakers, the suspension or adjournment of the meeting, or the adjournment or closure of the debate on the item under discussion.2. in the absence of the chairman during a plenary meeting or any part thereof, one of the vice-chairmen shall preside. a vice-chairman acting as chairman shall have the same powers and duties as the chairman.3. the chairman, or a vice-chairman acting as chairman, shall not vote but may appoint an alternate or adviser from his delegation to vote in his place.4. the chairman, in the exercise of his functions, remains under the authority of the commission.rule viiexecutive committeein accordance with article x of the constitution, the chairman of the commission shall be the chairman of the executive committee. he shall have, in relation to meetings of the executive committee, the same powers and duties as he has in relation to meetings of the commission. in the absence of the chairman during a meeting of the executive committee or any part thereof, one of the vice-chairmen of the commission shall preside. a vice-chairman acting as chairman shall have the same powers and duties as the chairman. a majority of the members of the committee shall constitute a quorum. decisions of the committee shall be taken by a majority of the votes cast. each member of the committee shall have one vote. meetings of the committee shall be held in private unless otherwise determined by the commission.rule viiiproposals and amendments at plenary meetings1. proposals and amendments for plenary meetings shall be introduced in writing and handed to the chairman of the commission who shall circulate copies to the delegations. subject to a contrary decision of the commission in a specific instance, no proposal shall be discussed or put to the vote at any plenary meeting unless copies of it have been circulated to all delegations not later than the day preceding the meeting. the chairman of the commission may, however, permit the discussion and consideration of amendments or of motions as to procedure even though these amendments and motions have not been circulated or have only been circulated the same day.2. a proposal may be withdrawn by its proposer at any time before voting on it has comme
  iii of the constitution and expenditures arising from articles iv, v and xii(2);(b) the special budgets relating to funds made available during the financial period from supplementary contributions paid under article xiii(4) for expenditures listed under article v.3.4 the administrative budget for the financial period shall consist of provisions for:- administrative expenditures under articles iv and xii(2).- expenditure under activities listed under article v. estimates under this chapter may, if necessary, be presented in a single total only but detailed estimates for each particular project will be prepared and approved as "supplementary details" of the administrative budget.- contingencies.3.5 the administrative budget shall be prepared by the executive committee and submitted to the commission.3.6 special budgets (3.3(b)) shall be prepared at appropriate times by the commission or the executive committee as the case may be.3.7 the administrative budget of the commission shall be submitted to the finance committee of the organization.regulation ivappropriations4.1 after the budgets have been adopted the appropriations therein will be the authority for the organization to incur obligations and make payments for the purposes for which the appropriations were voted and up to the amounts so voted.4.2 in cases of emergency, the director-general is authorized to accept supplementary contributions from a member or members of the commission or grants from other sources and incur expenditure against them for emergency action for which the said contributions or grants were specifically provided. such contributions or grants and expenditure relating thereto will be reported in detail to the next session of the executive committee or commission.4.3 any unliquidated prior year obligation shall at the end of the financial period be cancelled or where an obligation remains a valid charge, retained for future disbursement.4.4 transfers between provisions as per regulation 3.5 may be effected by the organization on the recommendation of the secretary of the executive committee. details of the transfers so effected will be reported to the executive committee.regulation vprovision of funds5.1 the appropriations of the administrative budget shall be financed by contributions from member governments determined and payable in accordance with article xiii paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of the constitution.5.1.1 pending receipt of annual contributions, the organization is authorized to finance budgeted expenditure from the uncommitted balance of the administrative budget.5.2 for determining the annual contributions of each member, the assessment for such member for the financial period shall be divided into two equal instalments, one of which shall be payable in the first calendar year and the other in the second calendar year of the financial period and the other one in the second calendar year.5.3 at the beginning of each calendar year the director-general shall inform member governments of their obligations in respect of annual contributions to the budget.5.4 contributions shall be due and payable in full within 30 days of the receipt of the communication of the director-general referred to in regulation 5.3 above, or as of the first day of the calendar year to which they relate, whichever is later. as of 1 january of the following calendar year, the unpaid balance of such contributions shall be considered to be one year in arrears.5.5 the annual contributions to the administrative budget shall be assessed in united states dollars and calculated on the basis of national income of each country as expressed in the scale of contributions to fao and the number of livestock. the currency in which contributions shall be paid is determined by the commission in accordance with article xiii(5) of the constitution.5.6 any state acquiring membership shall pay a contribution to the budget in accordance with the provisions of article xiii(2) for the financial period in which the membership becomes effective, such contribution beginning with the quarter 

