The Agreement of Joint Control of Forest Fire
Between the Government of the People's Republic of China
And the Government of Russian Federation
For the purpose of further strengthening the friendship between the Chinese and Russian people, improving the work of forest fire control in border areas of both countries, sharing experience in forest fire control as well as helping each other to prevent forest fires and reduce their losses, the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the Russian Federation (hereinafter referred to as "Both Parties") have agreed as follows:
Article I
Both Parties shall establish areas for joint control of forest fire in a 10 kilometer-wide strip on both sides of the border between the People's Republic of China and the Russian Federation.
Article II
1. For the coordination of actions by the joint forces for forest fire control, command units for forest fire control shall be established in areas designated in the Article I of the current Agreement inside China and the Russian Federation, and shall work under the leadership of the local governments.
2. The command units in respective areas of joint control shall be responsible for the work of joint forest fire control and ensure smooth liaison among them. They shall promptly inform one another through proper liaison channels in case of forest fire.
3. The People's Republic of China and the Russian Federation shall establish the following liaison stations for joint forest fire control in joint control areas inside their respective borders. The liaison stations shall establish direct liaison among them, with methods of liaison to be decided by the stations of both Parties and the local governments.
Inside Chinese border
Inside Russian border
1
Hunchun
Kraskino
2
Suifen He
Pogranicenyj
3
Hutou
Dal'nerecensk
4
Fuyuan
Khabarovsk
5
Fuyuan
Birobidzhan
6
Jiayin
Obluche
2
7
Jiayin
Arhara
8
Jiayin
Bureja
9
Heihe
Blagoveshchensk
10
Heihe
Svobodnyy
11
Huma
Shimanovsk
12
Huma
Magdagachi
13
Lianyin
Tachtamygda
14
Jielalin
Mogocha
15
Jielalin
Gazimurskij Zavod
16
Jielalin
Nerchinskij Zavod
17
Manzhouli
Zabaykalsk
4. The liaison stations shall work under the specific responsibility of the local command units for joint forest fire control, and the number of stations may be increased, if necessary, subject to the agreement of both Parties. The heads of command units of both Parties shall meet to communicate fire risks, share experience and information as well as consult each other and agree on matters related to the joint forest fire control.
5. The staff of the liaison stations, when required by work to cross borders of both Parties, shall go through the formalities in accordance with the respective current laws of both Parties and bilateral agreements.
Article III
1. The authorities of both Parties shall, in areas of joint forest fire control inside their respective borders, educate the local inhabitants on forest fire control.
2. The authorities of both Parties shall, through consultation, forbid the use of open fire in the joint control areas in seasons with high fire risks. If a forest fire occurs in the joint control area of one party and has the risk of spreading into the territory of the other party, or if one party discovers that a forest fire occurs inside the border of the other party, the authority of the former party shall inform its counterpart of the latter party through liaison stations to take appropriate control measures. If a forest fire originated from one party spreads into the other party's area, the latter shall take measures to suppress the fire and inform the authority of the former party where the forest fire has started, so that the causes shall be investigated and the losses caused by the fire be assessed. After the fire has been put out, the total loss shall be communicated to the authority of the former party and the amount of
3
compensation of each fire loss shall be specifically decided upon by the command units of forest fire control of both Parties.
Article IV
1. In order to prevent the spread of forest fires into each other's areas along the Sino-Russian border, the authorities of both Parties shall take active precautionary measures inside their own borders. The specific measures to be taken shall be studied by the local command units for forest fire control through liaison stations of both Parties.
2. Both Parties shall, inside their own borders, construct facilities for forest fire control and carry out air surveillances. During the critical period of forest fire prevention, both Parties shall organize professional forest fire brigades in the joint fire control areas, and provide them with necessary equipment and hold regular meetings for the staff from concerned units in border areas to share advanced experience of forest fire control.
Article V
1. If a forest fire occurs in the joint fire control area inside the border of one party and the authority of that party requests the assistance of the counterpart unit of the other party, the latter shall immediately organize human and material resources needed for fire suppression and send them to the specified area.
2. For the purpose of forest fire suppression, one party may allow for the participation of the personnel from the party, subject to the agreement of the corresponding units of both Parties.
The entry and exit formalities for fire fighting personnel shall be implemented in accordance with the Article 21 of the Agreement on the System of the Sino-Russian Border Management between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of Russian Federation, signed on May 27, 1994.
3. The airplanes and helicopters participating in the forest fire fighting shall obtain the approval of the authorities of both Parties and the permission of the responsible units of air control of both Parties before they cross the Sino-Russian border. Such a request of cross border flight shall be submitted by liaison stations and be studied in time.
4. If an airplane or helicopter needs an emergency landing, the responsible air control unit of the party accepting such a emergency landing shall promptly inform the responsible air control unit of the other party and provide necessary assistance to the airplane/helicopter
4
and its crew. 5. The fire fighting personnel sent abroad by the authorities of both Parties shall be led by a team leader and bring fire fighting equipment with them. The authority of the recipient party shall designate a responsible representative to and arrange work for the incoming assisting party and provide for their accommodation. The team leader and the designated representative shall together ensure the return of the assisting fire fighters to their home country.
6. If the incoming assisting fire fighters are unfortunately wounded or lose their life during fire fighting, the subsidies for their temporary or permanent loss of labour, or pensions for the dependents of the death victims shall be paid by social security agencies of the party where these wounded or deceased fire fighters belong to, in the manner provided for by the national law and regulations of that party.
Article VI
1. The recipient authority shall compensate the other authority all the costs related to the assistance and make the payment within one month of receiving the confirmation bill.
2. The cost of materials, equipment and fuel consumed during the fire fighting shall be calculated at the international market price.
3. The payment procedure for the compensation shall be negotiated by the heads of the authorities of both Parties in accordance with specific circumstances.
Article VII
1. This Agreement shall come into effect on the day of signature with a validity of five years. Upon its expiration, the Agreement shall be automatically extended for another five years, unless any one party gives its written notice of termination to the other party six months before the expiration of the Agreement, and thereafter shall be renewed in the same manner.
2. As from the day when this Agreement comes into effect, the Joint Agreement on Forest Protection and Fire Prevention, signed on the January 29, 1960, between the Government of the People's Republic of China and the Government of the Soviet Union of Socialist Republics shall terminate.
This Agreement is signed in Moscow on June 26, 1995 with two copies, each written in both Chinese and Russian, and both language version having equal validity.
In witness thereof,
(Signature) (Signature)
Plenipotentiary Representative Plenipotentiary Representative
the Government of the People's the Government of
Republic of China the Russian Federation
