Constitutive Act of the African Union

We, Heads of State and Government of the Member States of the 
Organization of African Unity (OAU):
The President of the People's Democratic Republic of Algeria 
The President of the Republic of Angola 
The President of the Republic of Benin 
The President of the Republic of Botswana 
The President of Burkina Faso 
The President of the Republic of Burundi 
The President of the Republic of Cameroon 
The President of the Republic of Cape Verde 
The President of the Central African Republic 
The President of the Republic of Chad 
The President of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros 
The President of the Republic of the Congo 
The President of the Republic of Cote d'Ivoire 
The President of the Democratic Republic of Congo 
The President of the Republic of Djibouti 
The President of the Arab Republic of Egypt 
The President of the State of Eritrea 
The Prime Minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of 
Ethiopia 
The President of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea 
The President of the Gabonese Republic 
The President of the Republic of The Gambia 
The President of the Republic of Ghana 
The President of the Republic of Guinea 
The President of the Republic of Guinea Bissau 
The President of the Republic of Kenya 
The Prime Minister of Lesotho 
The President of the Republic of Liberia 
The Leader of the 1st of September Revolution of the Great 
Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
The President of the Republic of Madagascar 
The President of the Republic of Malawi 
The President of the Republic of Mali 
The President of the Islamic Republic of Mauritania 
The Prime Minister of the Republic of Mauritius 
The President of the Republic of Mozambique 
The President of the Republic of Namibia 
The President of the Republic of Niger 
The President of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 
The President of the Republic of Rwanda 
The President of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic 
The President of the Republic of Sao Tome and Principe 
The President of the Republic of Senegal 
The President of the Republic of Seychelles 
The President of the Republic of Sierra Leone 
The President of the Republic of Somalia 
The President of the Republic of South Africa 
The President of the Republic of Sudan 
The King of Swaziland 
The President of the United Republic of Tanzania 
The President of the Togolese Republic 
The President of the Republic of Tunisia 
The President of the Republic of Uganda 
The President of the Republic of Zambia 
The President of the Republic of Zimbabwe 
                
INSPIRED by the noble ideals which guided the founding fathers 
of our Continental Organization and generations of 
Pan-Africanists in their determination to promote unity, 
solidarity, cohesion and cooperation among the peoples of 
                 
Africa and African States; 
CONSIDERING the principles and objectives stated in the 
Charter of the Organization of African Unity and the Treaty 
establishing the African Economic Community; 
                  
RECALLING the heroic struggles waged by our peoples and our 
countries for political independence, human dignity and 
economic emancipation;

CONSIDERING that since its inception, the Organization of 
African Unity has played a determining and invaluable role in 
the liberation of the continent, the affirmation of a common 
identity and the process of attainment of the unity of our 
Continent and has provided a unique framework for our 
collective action in Africa and in our relations with the rest 
of the world; 

DETERMINED to take up the multifaceted challenges that 
confront our continent and peoples in the light of the social, 
economic and political changes taking place in the world; 

CONVINCED of the need to accelerate the process of 
implementing the Treaty establishing the African Economic 
Community in order to promote the socio-economic development 
of Africa and to face more effectively the challenges posed by 
globalization;

GUIDED by our common vision of a united and strong Africa and 
by the need to build a partnership between governments and all 
segments of civil society, in particular women, youth and the 
private sector in order to strengthen solidarity and cohesion 
                  
CONSCIOUS of the fact that the scourge of conflicts in Africa 
constitutes a major impediment to the socio-economic 
development of the continent and of the need to promote peace, 
security and stability as a prerequisite for the 
implementation of our development and integration agenda; 

DETERMINED to promote and protect human and peoples' rights, 
consolidate democratic institutions and culture, and to ensure 
good governance and the rule of law;

FURTHER DETERMINED to take all necessary measures to 
strengthen our common institutions and provide them with the 
necessary powers and resources to enable them discharge their 
respective mandates effectively; 

RECALLING the Declaration which we adopted at the Fourth 
Extraordinary Session of our Assembly in Sirte, the Great 
Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, on 9.9. 99, in 
which we decided to establish an African Union, in conformity 
with the ultimate objectives of the Charter of our Continental 
Organization and the Treaty establishing the African Economic 
Community; 

HAVE AGREED AS FOLLOWS: 

Article 1
               	  
Definitions
In this Constitutive Act:
 "Act " means the present Constitutive Act; 
 "AEC " means the African Economic Community;
 "Assembly " means the Assembly of Heads of State and Government 
of the Union;

 "Charter " means the Charter of the OAU; 
 "Committee " means a Specialized Technical Committee of the 
Union;
 "Council " means the Economic, Social and Cultural Council of 
the Union; 
 "Court  " means the Court of Justice of the Union; 
 "Executive Council " means the Executive Council of Ministers 
of the Union; 
 "Member State " means a Member State of the Union;
 "OAU " means the Organization of African Unity; 
 "Parliament " means the Pan-African Parliament of the Union; 
'Union " means the African Union established by the present 
Constitutive Act. 

Article 2

Establishment
The African Union is hereby established in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act.

Article 3

Objectives
The objectives of the Union shall be to: 
Achieve greater unity and solidarity between the African 
counties and the peoples of Africa; 
Defend the sovereignty, territorial integrity and 
independence of its Member States;
Accelerate the political and socio-economic integration of 
the continent;
Promote and defend African common positions on issues of 
interest to the continent and its peoples;
Encourage international cooperation, taking due account of 
the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights;
Promote peace, security, and stability on the continent; 
Promote democratic principles and institutions, popular 
participation and good governance; 
Promote and protect human and peoples' rights in accordance 
with the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights and 
other relevant human rights instruments;
Establish the necessary conditions which enable the 
continent to play its rightful role in the global economy 
and in international negotiations;
Promote sustainable development at the economic, social and 
cultural levels as well as the integration of African 
economies;
Promote cooperation in all fields of human activity to raise 
the living standards of African peoples;
Coordinate and harmonize policies between existing and 
future Regional Economic Communities for the gradual 
attainment of the objectives of the Union;
Advance the development of the continent by promoting 
research in all fields, in particular in science and 
technology;
Work with relevant international partners in the eradication 
of preventable diseases and the promotion of good health on 
the continent. 

Article 4

Principles
The Union shall function in accordance with the following 
principles:
Sovereign equality and interdependence among Member States 
of the Union;
Respect of borders existing on achievement of independence; 
Participation of the African peoples in the activities of 
the Union; Establishment of a common defence policy for the African 
Continent;
Peaceful resolution of conflicts among Member States of the 
Union through such appropriate means as may be decided upon 
by the Assembly; 
Prohibition of the use of force or threat to use force among 
Member States of the Union; 
Non-interference by any Member State in the internal affairs 
of another;
The right of the Union to intervene in a Member State 
pursuant to a decision of the Assembly in respect of grave 
circumstances, namely war crimes, genocide and crimes 
against humanity; 
Peaceful co-existence of Member States and their right to 
live in peace and security;
The right of Member States to request intervention from the 
Union in order to restore peace and security; 
Promotion of self-reliance within the framework of the 
Union; 
Promotion of gender equality;
Respect for democratic principles, human rights, the rule of 
law and good governance; 
Promotion of social justice to ensure balanced economic 
development;
Respect for the sanctity of human life, condemnation and 
rejection of impunity and political assassination, acts of 
terrorism and subversive activities; 
Condemnation and rejection of unconstitutional changes of 
governments. 

Article 5

Organs of the Union
1. The organs of the Union shall be:
The Assembly of the Union; 
The Executive Council; 
The Pan-African Parliament; 
The Court of Justice; 
The Commission; 
The Permanent Representatives Committee; 
The Specialized Technical Committees; 
The Economic, Social and Cultural Council; 
The Financial Institutions; 
2. Other organs that the Assembly may decide to establish. 

Article 6

The Assembly
1. The Assembly shall be composed of Heads of States and 
Government or their duly accredited representatives. 
2. The Assembly shall be the supreme organ of the Union. 
3. The Assembly shall meet at least once a year in ordinary 
session. At the request of any Member State and on approval by 
a two-thirds majority of the Member States, the Assembly shall 
meet in extraordinary session. 
4. The Office of the Chairman of the Assembly shall be held 
for a period of one year by a Head of State or Government 
elected after consultations among the Member States.

Article 7

Decisions of the Assembly
1. The Assembly shall take its decisions by consensus or, 
failing which, by a two-thirds majority of the Member States 
of the Union. However, procedural matters, including the 
question of whether a matter is one of procedure or not, shall 
be decided by a simple majority.
2. Two-thirds of the total membership of the Union shall form 
a quorum at any meeting of the Assembly.

Article 8

Rules of Procedure of the Assembly
The Assembly shall adopt its own Rules of Procedure. 

Article 9

Powers and Functions of the Assembly
1. The functions of the Assembly shall be to:
Determine the common policies of the Union; 
Receive, consider and take decisions on reports and 
recommendations from the other organs of the Union;
Consider requests for Membership of the Union;
Establish any organ of the Union; 
Monitor the implementation of policies and decisions of the 
Union as well as ensure compliance by all Member States; 
Adopt the budget of the Union;
Give directives to the Executive Council on the management 
of conflicts, war and other emergency situations and the 
restoration of peace; 
Appoint and terminate the appointment of the judges of the 
Court of Justice; 
Appoint the Chairman of the Commission and his or her deputy 
or deputies and Commissioners of the Commission and 
determine their functions and terms of office. 
2. The Assembly may delegate any of its powers and functions 
to any organ of the Union. 

Article 10

The Executive Council
1. The Executive Council shall be composed of the Ministers of 
Foreign Affairs or such other Ministers or Authorities as are 
designated by the Governments of Member States.
2. Council shall meet at least twice a year in ordinary 
session. It shall also meet in an extra-ordinary session at 
the request of any Member State and upon approval by 
two-thirds of all Member States.

Article 11

Decisions of the Executive Council
1. The Executive Council shall take its decisions by consensus 
or, failing which, by a two-thirds majority of the Member 
States. However, procedural matters, including the question of 
whether a matter is one of procedure or not, shall be decided 
by a simple majority. 
2. Two-thirds of the total membership of the Union shall form 
a quorum at any meeting of the Executive Council. 

Article 12

Rules of Procedure of the Executive Council
The Executive Council shall adopt its own Rules of Procedure. 

Article 13

Functions of the Executive Council
1. The Executive Council shall co-ordinate and take decisions 
on policies in areas of common interest to the Member States, 
including the following:
Foreign trade;
Energy, industry and mineral resources;
Food, agricultural and animal resources, livestock 
production and forestry; 
Water resources and irrigation; 
Environmental protection, humanitarian action and disaster 
response and relief;
Transport and communications; 
Insurance;
Education, culture, health and human resources development;
Science and technology; 
Nationality, residency and immigration matters; 
Social security, including the formulation of mother and 
child care policies, as well as policies relating to the 
disabled and the handicapped;
Establishment of a system of African awards, medals and 
prizes. 
2. The Executive Council shall be responsible to the Assembly. 
It shall consider issues referred to it and monitor the 
implementation of policies formulated by the Assembly. 
3. The Executive Council may delegate any of its powers and 
functions mentioned in paragraph 1 of this Article to the 
Specialized Technical Committees established under Article 14 
of this Act.

Article 14

The Specialized Technical Committees
Establishment and Composition
1. There is hereby established the following Specialized 
Technical Committees, which shall be responsible to the 
Executive Council:
The Committee on Rural Economy and Agricultural Matters;
The Committee on Monetary and Financial Affairs; 
The Committee on Trade, Customs and Immigration Matters; 
The Committee on Industry, Science and Technology, Energy, 
Natural Resources and Environment;
The Committee on Transport, Communications and Tourism;
The Committee on Health, Labour and Social Affairs; and
The Committee on Education, Culture and Human Resources.
2. The Assembly shall, whenever it deems appropriate, 
restructure the existing Committees or establish other 
Committees. 
3. The Specialized Technical Committees shall be composed of 
Ministers or senior officials responsible for sectors falling 
within their respective areas of competence. 

Article 15

Functions of the Specialized Technical Committees
Each Committee shall within its field of competence:
Prepare projects and programmes of the Union and submit in 
to the Executive Council;
Ensure the supervision, follow-up and the evaluation of the 
implementation of decisions taken by the organs of the 
Union; 
Ensure the coordination and harmonization of projects and 
programmes of the Union;
Submit to the Executive Council either on its own initiative 
or at the request of the Executive Council, reports and 
recommendations on the implementation of the provision of 
this Act; and 
Carry out any other functions assigned to it for the purpose 
of ensuring the implementation of the provisions of this 
Act. 

Article 16

Meetings
1. Subject to any directives given by the Executive Council, 
each Committee shall meet as often as necessary and shall 
prepare its rules of procedure and submit them to the 
Executive Council for approval.

Article 17

The Pan-African Parliament
1. In order to ensure the full participation of African 
peoples in the development and economic integration of the 
continent, a Pan-African Parliament shall be established. 
2. The composition, powers, functions and organization of the 
Pan-African Parliament shall be defined in a protocol relating 
thereto. 

Article 18

The Court of Justice
1. A Court of Justice of the Union shall be established; 
2. The statute, composition and functions of the Court of 
Justice shall be defined in a protocol relating thereto.

Article 19

The Financial Institutions
The Union shall have the following financial institutions, 
whose rules and regulations shall be defined in protocols 
relating thereto:
The African Central Bank; 
The African Monetary Fund; 
The African Investment Bank. 

Article 20

The Commission
1. There shall be established a Commission of the Union, which 
shall be the Secretariat of the Union.
2. The Commission shall be composed of the Chairman, his or 
her deputy or deputies and the Commissioners. They shall be 
assisted by the necessary staff for the smooth functioning of 
the Commission.
3. The structure, functions and regulations of the Commission 
shall be determined by the Assembly. 

Article 21

The Permanent Representatives Committee
1. There shall be established a Permanent Representatives 
Committee. It shall be composed of Permanent Representatives 
to the Union and other Plenipotentiaries of Member States. 
2. The Permanent Representatives Committee shall be charged 
with the responsibility of preparing the work of the Executive 
Council and acting on the Executive Council's instructions. It 
may set up such sub-committees or working groups as it may 
deem necessary.

Article 22

The Economic, Social and Cultural Council
1. The Economic, Social and Cultural Council shall be an 
advisory organ composed of different social and professional 
groups of the Member States of the Union.
2. The functions, powers, composition and organization of the 
Economic, Social and Cultural Council shall be determined by 
the Assembly.

Article 23

Imposition of Sanctions
1. The Assembly shall determine the appropriate sanctions to 
be imposed on any Member State that defaults in the payment of 
its contributions to the budget of the Union in the following 
manner: denial of the right to speak at meetings, to vote, to 
present candidates for any position or post within the Union 
or to benefit from any activity or commitments therefrom.
2. Furthermore, any Member State that fails to comply with the 
decisions and policies of the Union may be subjected to other 
sanctions, such as the denial of transport and communications 
links with other Member States, and other measures of a 
political and economic nature to be determined by the Assembly.

Article 24

The Headquarters of the Union
1. The Headquarters of the Union shall be in Addis Ababa in 
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
2. There may be established such other offices of the Union as 
the Assembly may, on the recommendation of the Executive 
Council, determine. 

Article 25

Working Languages
The working languages of the Union and all its institutions 
shall be, if possible, African languages, Arabic, English, 
French and Portuguese.

Article 26

Interpretation
The Court shall be seized with matters of interpretation 
arising from the application or implementation of this Act. 
Pending its establishment, such matters shall be submitted to 
the Assembly of the Union, which shall decide by a two-thirds 
majority.

Article 27

Signature, Ratification and Accession
1. This Act shall be open to signature, ratification and 
accession by the Member States of the OAU in accordance with 
their respective constitutional procedures.
2. The instruments of ratification shall be deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the OAU.
3. Any Member State of the OAU acceding to this Act after its 
entry into force shall deposit the instrument of accession 
with the Chairman of the Commission.

Article 28

Entry into Force
This Act shall enter into force thirty (30) days after the 
deposit of the instruments of ratification by two-thirds of 
the Member States of the OAU.

Article 29

Admission to Membership
1. Any African State may, at any time after the entry into 
force of this Act, notify the Chairman of the Commission of 
its intention to accede to this Act and to be admitted as a 
member of the Union. 
2. The Chairman of the Commission shall, upon receipt of such 
notification, transmit copies thereof to all Member States. 
Admission shall be decided by a simple majority of the Member 
States. The decision of each Member State shall be transmitted 
to the Chairman of the Commission who shall, upon receipt of 
the required number of votes, communicate the decision to the 
State concerned. 

Article 30

Suspension
Governments which shall come to power through unconstitutional 
means shall not be allowed to participate in the activities of 
the Union. 

Article 31

Cessation of Membership
1. Any State which desires to renounce its membership shall 
forward a written notification to the Chairman of the 
Commission, who shall inform Member States thereof. At the end 
of one year from the date of such notification, if not 
withdrawn, the Act shall cease to apply with respect to the 
renouncing State, which shall thereby cease to belong to the 
Union.
2. During the period of one year referred to in paragraph 1 of 
this Article, any Member State wishing to withdraw from the 
Union shall comply with the provisions of this Act and shall 
be bound to discharge its obligations under this Act up to the 
date of its withdrawal.

Article 32

Amendment and Revision
1. Any Member State may submit proposals for the amendment or 
revision of this Act.
2. Proposals for amendment or revision shall be submitted to 
the Chairman of the Commission who shall transmit same to 
Member States within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof. 
3. The Assembly, upon the advice of the Executive Council, 
shall examine these proposals within a period of one year 
following notification of Member States, in accordance with 
the provisions of paragraph 2 of this Article.
4. Amendments or revisions shall be adopted by the Assembly by 
consensus or, failing which, by a two-thirds majority and 
submitted for ratification by all Member States in accordance 
with their respective constitutional procedures. They shall 
enter into force thirty (30) days after the deposit of the 
instruments of ratification with the Chairman of the 
Commission by a two-thirds majority of the Member States.


Article 33

Transitional Arrangements and Final Provisions
1. This Act shall replace the Charter of the Organization of 
African Unity. However, the Charter shall remain operative for 
a transitional period of one year or such further period as 
may be determined by the Assembly, following the entry into 
force of the Act, for the purpose of enabling the OAU/AEC to 
undertake the necessary measures regarding the devolution of 
its assets and liabilities to the Union and all matters 
relating thereto. 
2. The provisions of this Act shall take precedence over and 
supersede any inconsistent or contrary provisions of the 
Treaty establishing the African Economic Community.
3. Upon the entry into force of this Act, all necessary 
measures shall be undertaken to implement its provisions and 
to ensure the establishment of the organs provided for under 
the Act in accordance with any directives or decisions which 
may be adopted in this regard by the Parties thereto within 
the transitional period stipulated above.
4. Pending the establishment of the Commission, the OAU 
General Secretariat shall be the interim Secretariat of the 
Union. 
5. This Act, drawn up in four (4) original texts in the 
Arabic, English, French and Portuguese languages, all four (4) 
being equally authentic, shall be deposited with the 
Secretary-General of the OAU and, after its entry into force, 
with the Chairman of the Commission who shall transmit a 
certified true copy of the Act to the Government of each 
signatory State. The Secretary-General of the OAU and the 
Chairman of the Commission shall notify all signatory States 
of the dates of the deposit of the instruments of ratification 
or accession and shall upon entry into force of this Act 
register the same with the Secretariat of the United Nations.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, WE have adopted this Act. 
Done at Lom , Togo, this 11th day of July, 2000.
                   
