CONSTITUTION1 OF THE INTERNATIONAL
RICE COMMISSION. FORMULATED AT THE INTERNATIONAL 
RICE MEETING AT BAGUIO, 1-13 MARCH
1948, AND APPROVED BY THE CONFERENCE OF THE
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS AT ITS FOURTH SESSION HELD
IN WASHINGTON FROM 15 TO 29 NOVEMBER 1948
Preamble
The Council of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, having regard to the deliberations of the Rice Study Group which
met at Trivandrum, of the Third Session of the Conference of the Organization,
and of the International Rice Meeting held at Baguio, and with a view to co
operative action in matters relating to the production, conservation, distribution,
and consumption of rice (excepting matters relating to international trade)
hereby establishes an International Rice Commission in accordance with the
following Constitution.
ARTICLE I
The Commission
There shall be a Commission, known as the International Rice Commission,
with the functions set forth in Article IV of this Constitution.
ARTICLE II
Membership
The members of the Commission shall be such of the governments, members
of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, as may accept
this Constitution in accordance with the provisions of Article VII hereof.
ARTICLE III
Organization
1. Each government that becomes a member of the Commission as defined
in Article II hereof (hereinafter called a " member government ") shall have
the right to be represented at meetings of the Commission by a single delegate,
who may be accompanied by an alternate and by experts and advisers. Alter
nates, experts, and advisers shall be entitled to take part in the proceedings of
the Commission but not to vote, except in the case of an alternate who is duly
authorized to act for a delegate.
2. Each member government shall have one vote. Decisions of the
Commission shall be taken by a simple majority of votes cast except as otherwise
provided by this Constitution. A majority of the members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum.
3. The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among the delegates,
who shall serve for a period of one year, without prejudice to the right of
re-election.
4. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 5 of this Article, the
Commission shall, with the concurrence of the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization, establish its own rules of procedure and determine
the time and place of its meetings.
5. The Chairman shall call a meeting of the Commission at least once
a year, unless otherwise directed by a majority of member governments. The
initial meeting shall be called by the Director-General of the Food and
Agriculture Organization within six months after the entry into force of this
Constitution and at such place as he may designate.
6. Any member government shall have the right, with the concurrence
of the Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization, to call
for a special meeting of the Commission.
7. The seat of the Commission shall be the same place as the seat of
the Far Eastern regional office of the Food and Agriculture Organization.
8. The Director-General of the Food and Agriculture Organization shall
appoint a Secretary to the Commission and shall provide its secretariat from
the staff of the Far Eastern regional office.
ARTICLE IV
Functions
The Commission shall, except in matters relating to international trade,
have the functions of :
(a) formulating and keeping under review the scientific, technical, and
economic problems involved in the production, conservation, distri
bution, and consumption of rice;
(b) promoting and co-ordinating research into those problems and its
application to the development and adoption of improved methods
in everyday practice;
(c) encouraging and assisting the mobilization and use of scientifically and
technically trained persons in such a way as to secure the greatest
common benefit to member countries in matters relating to the pro
duction, conservation, distribution, and consumption of rice;
(d) undertaking, where necessary and appropriate, co-operative projects
directed to the solution of the above-mentioned problems;
(e) assembling, collating, and disseminating, through the publications of
the Food and Agriculture Organization and otherwise, information
relating to the production, conservation, distribution, and consumption
of rice ;
(/) establishing such committees and calling such meetings of experts as
the Commission may consider desirable for the performance of the
foregoing functions;
(g) recommending to member governments, through the Food and Agri
culture Organization, such national and international action as may
appear to the Commission to be necessary or desirable for the solution
of the above-mentioned problems ;
(h) recommending to the Food and Agriculture Organization the provision
of technical assistance to member governments in measures directed
to that end;
(>>') extending its good offices in assisting member governments to secure
materials and equipment necessary for improvement of the production,
conservation, distribution, or consumption of rice;
(/) reporting annually on its activities to the Council of the Food and
Agriculture Organization, and making such other reports to the Food
and Agriculture Organization on matters relating to the production,
conservation, distribution, and consumption of rice as the Commission
itself may consider expedient or the Council of the Food and Agri
culture Organization may require.
ARTICLE V
Co-operation with international Organizations
The Commission shall maintain, through the Food and Agriculture
Organization, close liaison with the United Nations and its specialized agencies
in matters of mutual interest.
ARTICLE VI
Expenses
1. Expenses incurred by delegates and their alternates, experts, and
advisers in attending meetings of the Commission and expenses incurred by
experts under paragraph (/) of Article IV hereof shall be determined and paid
by their respective governments.
2. The expenses of the secretariat of the Commission and any expenses
incurred by the chairman of the Commission in performing duties connected
with its work in intervals between meetings of the Commission shall be deter
mined and paid by the Food and Agriculture Organization within the limits
of an annual budget prepared and approved in accordance with the Rules of
Procedure and Financial Regulations of that Organization for the time being
in force,
3. Expenses incurred by the Commission in undertaking any co-operative
project in accordance with paragraph (d) of Article IV hereof shall, unless
they are met by the Food and Agriculture Organization or from any other
source, be determined and paid by member governments in such manner and
proportions as they may mutually agree.
ARTICLE VII
Acceptance and withdrawal
1. Acceptance of this Constitution by any member government of the
Food and Agriculture Organization shall be effected by the deposit of a
notification of acceptance with the Director-General of the Organization and
shall take effect on receipt of such notification by the Director-General, who shall
forthwith inform each of the member governments of the Organization.
2. Any member government may withdraw from the Commission at any
time after the expiration of one year from the date on which its acceptance
takes effect, or this Constitution comes into force, whichever is the later, by
giving written notice of such withdrawal to the Director-General of the Food
and Agriculture Organization, who shall forthwith inform all member govern
ments of the Commission. Any such notice of withdrawal shall become effective
six months after the date of its receipt by the Director-General.
ARTICLE VIII
Amendments
This Constitution may be amended by the vote of a two-thirds majority
of all the members of the Commission, with the concurrence of the Council
of the Food and Agriculture Organization.
ARTICLE IX
Entry into force
This Constitution shall enter into force as soon as notifications of acceptance
have been received from the governments of at least ten countries members
of the Food and Agriculture Organization representing in the aggregate not
less than half of the world production of rice in the crop year 1947/48 as shown
by official statistics.

