AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS
AND
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC
ON COOPERATION ON VETERINARY MA TIERS
The Government of the Republic of Cyprus and the Government of the Czech Republic
(hereinafter only the Contracting Parties) having taken into account-
Common political will to increase commercial exchange of animals, of products of animal
origin and feed,
The benefit of cooperation in the protection against possible spread of animal diseases
and diseases transferable from animals on humans,
The fact that the two states are members of the International Epizootic Office, (O.1.E.),
Have come to the following understanding:
ARTICLE I
The two Parties shall promote a wide scope of activities in the veterinary field with the
aim of promoting import and export of Jive animals, products of animal origin and feed
between the two states in keeping with their laws, regulations and procedures.
For the purposes of export from the territory of the state of one Contracting Party into
the other, the above mentioned products have to comply with all the existing codes and
regulations of the importing country, so as to allow for any commercial exchange and to
ensure the protection of the two countries' territories against infected animals, diseases
transferable from animals to humans and against the effect of harmful matters that threaten
both human and animal health.
ARTICLE II
The two Contracting Parties shall elaborate, in mutual agreement, a programme of
common actions in veterinary field, focused on imports and exports of Jive animals and
products of animal origin from the territory of the state of one Contracting Party to the
other. This programme shall include-
(a) Setting of targets goals and time schedule·
(b) approval and implementation of common activities·
(c) Contracting Parties responsibilities for individual phases of common activities·
(d) verification measures and evaluation of the activities·
(e) release of information on the outcome of common activities.
ARTICLE III
The two Contracting Parties agree with the support of the following common activities:
(a) Issue of veterinary certificates for live animals, products of animal origin and feed
for import and export into the states of the Contracting Parties so as to meet
veterinary conditions adopted by laws and internal regulations of the Contracting
Parties,
(b) prevention, treatment and combating the diseases that are the subject matter of
common priorities and interest,
(c) regular, long term and useful exchange of information through statistical bulletins
on ill animals, hit by diseases listed on «A» and «B» lists of the International
Epizootics Office, (O.1.E.),
181
(d) exchange of specific information on sanitary standpoints with stress being laid on
processing procedures of products of animal origin that will be exported to the
countries of the Contracting Parties,
( e) exchange of veterinary specialists with the aim of getting information on the
health condition of animals and animal products, cooperation in the field of
veterinary research and, through inspections made by experts of the two
Contracting Parties, in processing facilities that process the above mentioned
products,
(f) cooperation between veterinary laboratories in the area of animal diseases
diagnostics, of foodstuff hygiene, checking of veterinary biopreparations and
medicines and protection of animals against harmful environmental influence,
(g) exchange of technical literature from veterinary science field including the
information of the organisation of veterinary service, including legal veterinary
regulations.
ARTICLE IV
The two Contracting Parties shall inform each other without delay about cases of diseases
on territories of their states, whose official notification considers the International Epizootic
Office as mandatory and which are listed on the «A» list of this Office and of the diseases and
mass infections mutually agreed upon by the two Contracting Parties.
In the case of occurrence of a disease listed on the «A» list of the International Epizootic
Office, (O.1.E.), geographical details will be announced together with epidemic points of view
on the disease spread, the type of virus in the case of foot and mouth disease, as well as
measures adopted to eradicate the disease, especially measures concerning export.
ARTICLE V
The Contracting Parties pledge to discontinue the export of animals, of products of
animal origin and feed from one state to the other in the case of emergence of an animal
disease that might spread to the importing state.
ARTICLE VI
The two Contracting Parties pledge that in case when one of the Contracting Parties stops
the import of live animals, products of animal origin and feed from the territory of the state
of the other Contracting Party for veterinary sanitary reasons, they shall inform, without
delay, the other Contracting Party about their decision and shall supply information on
requirements that are necessary to resume import.
ARTICLE VII
The Contracting Parties pledge to take the necessary measures that the exported products
of animal origin should not contain any residues of drugs, hormones, pesticides, toxins and
other substances harmful for human health and that they are in keeping with the tolerance
limits set in the cooperation programmes.
ARTICLE VIII
The respective bodies of the Contracting Parties shall keep each other mutually informed
of their experience even in cases of non-infectious animal diseases and of the measures taken
to alleviate other harmful agents (toxit influences, etc.) that may have economic
consequences.
ARTICLE IX
1. The veterinary bodies of the Contracting Parties responsible for the implementation of
the agreement shall be:
182
From the side of Cyprus the Department of Veterinary Service of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment of the Republic of Cyprus·
from the Czech side the State Veterinary Administration of the Czech Republic.
2. In case of need, the representatives of the Contracting Parties shall hold meetings
alternatively on the territory of the Czech Republic and of the Republic of Cyprus in
mutually agreed upon periods, but at least once in two years. These meetings shall also be
attended by experts of the appropriate veterinary bodies of the two Contracting Parties.
3. Any disputes which the representatives of the Contracting Parties could not settle, will
be solved through diplomatic channels.
ARTICLEX
The payment of expenses attached to international travels of delegations carried out
within the framework of this Agreement and the payment of expenses related to the stay at
the place of destination shall be agreed upon on the case by case basis.
ARTICLE XI
This Agreement may be modified by mutual agreement of the two Contracting Parties.
The modifications shall take effect on the day of the second notification.
ARTICLE XII
The present Agreement is subject to the approval in virtue of the internal legal
regulations of the two Contracting Parties and shall take effect on the day of the service of
the later note on this approval. The present Agreement has been concluded for a period of
five years and it shall be automatically extended for five years unless one of the Contracting
Parties denounces it in writing at least six months before its expiration.
Done in Prague, this 5th of June, 1997 in two originals each made in the Czech, Greek and
English languages, the three versions being equally authentic. In case of various
interpretation, the English version shall be decisive.
