AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE, NATURAL RESOURCES
AND ENVIRONMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF CYPRUS
AND THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
OF THE CZECH REPUBLIC
ON COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF AGRICULTURE
The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Environment of the Republic of
Cyprus and the Ministry of Agriculture of the Czech Republic hereinafter only the
"Contracting Parties",
Having regard to the close conditions of the development of agriculure in transition
period towards market economy, guided by the efforts to develop and strengthen cooperation
between the two Ministries,
Desiring to create and promote direct and mutually advantageous relationships between
businesses, institutions, agricultural farms, cooperatives and other entities of the Republic of
Cyprus and the Czech Republic, hereinafter only the "partners",
Agreed as follows:
ARTICLE I
The Contracting Parties shall cooperate in economic, manufacturing, scientific and technological
area within the scope of their powers and in virtue of the legal standards of the two
Contracting Parties' states.
ARTICLE II
The cooperation shall be mainly focussed on the following:
1. Plant production: plant breeding, seed production, agricultural cultures' cultivating
including the use of modern technologies of highly productive plant genetic material,
the use of production methods of environmentally clean products and adequate plant
protection means.
2. Animal production: breeding, cultivation and preeding work, use of modern technologies
in the breeding of highly productive animals.
3. Establishment and operation of efficient agricultural farms.
4. Processing and use of agricultural products, organising of the activities of private and
state-owned businesses and possibilities for establishing of working contracts between
partners.
5. Organisation of systems of use and maintenance of agricultural machines,
6. Support to programmes of scientific and technical cooperation between the interested
research institutes and other organisations.
ARTICLE Ill
The Contracting Parties shall regularly hold mutual consultations aimed at the policy and
development of agriculture and foodstuff industry, on environmental protection and on
securing national needs for agricultural and foodstuH products.
ARTICLE IV
The Contracting Parties shall promote the establishment of contacts between the interested
partners with· the aim of carrying out mutually advantageous exchange of agricultural
and foodstuff products and of fulfilling common projects in the areas quoted in the article II.
ARTICLE V
The Contracting Parties shall, for the sake of the fulfilment of the agreement, promote:
(a) Cooperation of research institutes and centres in working out common research
themes, in exchange of results of scientific research and in holding of seminars,
symposiums, consultations, etc.
171
(b) the partners interested in commercial cooperation or in the establishment of joint
ventures to manufacture products of common interest
(c) adequate services focused on the exchange of normative acts, luws , 1mp1cmentutln11
decrees and statistical data.
ARTICLE VI
The exchange of seed samples, technology and other production and also of published
information will be curried out on the basis or reciprocal exchange free of charge or under
other conditions, agreed upon among the partners.
Mutual exchanges of scientific workers, specialists and visiting fellows shall be carried out
under the conditions agreed upon between the two Contracting Parties or negotiating
partners.
In case of need for financing of further programmes and projects of economic, scientific
and technological cooperation, financing shall be carried out within the budget possibilities
of the Contracting Parties.
ARTICLE VII
The coordination of specific activities that are the subject of cooperation shall be ensured
by the empowered representatives of the Contracting Parties who will monitor and
coordinate the progress and fulfilment of the joint agreed upon projects in keeping with the
present agreement.
ARTICLE VIII
The Contracting Parties pledge not to disclose economic, industrial, scientific and
technical information they got from the other party.
The use of the outcome of economic, scientific and technical cooperation will be carried
out following mutual agreement of the Contracting Parties.
ARTICLE IX
The agreement allows for other directions and forms or cooperation on which the
Contracting Parties will agree within the framework of powers of the two Contracting
Parties.
ARTICLE X
The agreement takes effect on the day of its signature. The present agreement has been
concluded for a period of 5 years and shall be automatically extended for further 5 years
unless one of the Contracting Parties denounces it six months before its expiration.
Done in Prague, this 5 day of June 1977 in two originals each made in the Czech, Greek
and English languages, the three versions being equally authentic. In case of difference in
interpretation, the English version shall be decisive.
