PROTOCOL
setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries
Partnership Agreement between the European Community on the one hand, and the
Government of Denmark and the Home Rule Government of Greenland, on the other hand
Article 1
Period of application and fishing opportunities
1. For a period of six years from 1 January 2007, the
Greenland authorities authorise Community fishing vessels to
engage in fishing activities up to the level of the fishing opportunities
set out in Chapter I of the Annex and those established
according to paragraph 2.
The levels of the fishing opportunities set out in Chapter I of
the Annex may be revised by the Joint Committee.
2. No later than 1 December 2007 and of each subsequent
year, the Joint Committee shall agree upon the fishing opportunities
for the species listed in Chapter I of the Annex for the
following year taking into account available scientific advice, the
precautionary approach, the needs of the fishing industry and in
particular the quantities set out in paragraph 7 of this Article.
In the event that the fishing opportunities are established by the
Joint Committee at a lower level than the level set out in
Chapter I of the Annex, Greenland shall compensate the
Community in subsequent years by corresponding fishing
opportunities or in the same year by other fishing opportunities.
If no compensation is agreed between the Parties, the financial
arrangements, including the parameters for the calculation of
the value, referred to in Article 2(1) of this Protocol shall be
adjusted proportionately.
3. The quota for shrimp in East Greenland may be fished in
areas West of Greenland provided that arrangements for quota
transfers between ship owners from Greenland and the
European Community have been established on a companyto-
company basis. The Greenland authorities shall undertake
to facilitate such arrangements. The transfers of quotas can
only take place within a maximum of 2 000 tonnes annually
in areas of West Greenland. The fishery carried out by the
Community vessels shall take place on the same conditions
subject to the provisions of Chapter III of the Annex as laid
down in the license issued to the Greenlandic ship owner.
4. Authorisations for experimental fisheries shall be made
available for a trial period of maximum six month each, in
accordance with the Annex.
5. When the Parties conclude that the experimental
campaigns have achieved positive results, the Greenland authorities
shall allocate 50 % of the fishing opportunities on the new
species to the Community fleet, until the end of this Protocol,
with a corresponding increase in the part of the financial
compensation referred to in Article 2.
6. Greenland shall offer to the Community additional catch
opportunities. If the Community accepts, in whole or in part,
such offer, the financial contribution referred to in Article 2(1)
shall be increased proportionately. The procedure to be
followed as regards the allocation of additional catch opportunities
is set out in the Annex to this Protocol.
7. The minimum quantities for maintaining Greenlandic
fishing activities are hereby set at the following levels each year:
Species (tonnes) Western stock
(NAFO 0/1)
Eastern stock
(ICES XIV/V)
Snowcrab 4 000
Cod 30 000 (1)
Redfish 2 500 5 000
Greenland halibut 4 700 4 000
Shrimp 25 000 1 500
(1) May be fished West or East.
8. Greenland shall not issue licences to Community vessels
otherwise than under this Protocol.
Article 2
Financial contribution - Methods of payment
1. For the period referred to in Article 1 of this Protocol, the
financial contribution of the Community referred to in Article 7
of the Agreement shall be EUR 85 843 464 (1). To this shall be
added a financial reserve of EUR 9 240 000 out of which
payment shall be made according to the method set out in
paragraph 3 below, for quantities of cod and capelin actually
made available by Greenland beyond those set out in Chapter I
of the Annex hereto.
2. Paragraph 1 above shall apply subject to the provisions of
Articles 1(2), (5) and (6) and 6 of this Protocol. The total
amount of the financial contribution paid by the European
Community shall not be more than twice the amount
indicated in Article 2(1).
3. Without prejudice to Article 1(2), (5) and (6) of this
Protocol, the Community shall pay the financial contribution
referred to in paragraph 1 above in the form of an annual
amount at the rate of EUR 14 307 244 during the period of
application of this Protocol. As regards cod and capelin every
year Greenland shall notify the Community authorities of any
quantities of cod and capelin made available for catching
beyond the amounts set out in Chapter I of the Annex
hereto. The Community shall pay for those additional
amounts 17,5 % of the first landing value at the rate of EUR
1 800 per ton for cod and EUR 100 per ton for capelin, minus
the fees paid by ship owners, up to a maximum of EUR
1 540 000 per year, to cover both species. Any part of this
financial reserve not used in one year may be carried over to
pay Greenland for additional quantities of cod and capelin made
available for catching in the subsequent two years.
4. The Community shall pay the annual amount of the
financial contribution no later than 30 June 2007 in the first
year and no later than 1 March in the following years and the
annual amount of the financial reserve for cod and capelin, by
the same dates or as soon as possible thereafter following the
notification of the availability of the quantities in question.
5. Subject to Article 4 of this Protocol, the Greenland authorities
shall have full discretion regarding the use to which this
financial contribution and financial reserve are put, except for
annual amounts of EUR 500 000 and EUR 100 000 which
shall be applied respectively for the operation of the
Greenland Institute of Natural Resources and for training of
fisheries officials, and in 2007 an amount of EUR 186 022
to be used for cod management plan studies.
6. The financial contribution shall be paid into a Public
Treasury account opened with a financial institution specified
by the Greenland authorities.
Article 3
Suspension and review of payment of the financial
contributionon grounds of force majeure
1. Where serious circumstances, other than natural
phenomena, prevent fishing activities in the Greenlandic EEZ,
the European Community may suspend payment of the
financial contribution provided for in Article 2(1) of this
Protocol following consultations between the two Parties
where possible, and provided that the Community has paid in
full any amounts due at the time of suspension.
2. Payment of the financial contribution shall resume as
soon as the parties find, by mutual agreement following consultations,
that the circumstances preventing fishing activities are
no longer present.
3. The validity of the licences granted to Community vessels
under Article 5 of the Agreement shall be extended by a period
equal to the period during which fishing activities were
suspended.
Article 4
Support for securing continued responsible fishing in the
Greenland EEZ
1. Every year an amount of EUR 3 261 449 (exceptionally
for 2007 EUR 3 224 244) of the financial contribution referred
to in Article 2(1) of this Protocol shall be put towards
improving and implementing a sectoral fisheries policy in
Greenland with a view to securing continued responsible
fishing in the Greenlandic EEZ. This contribution shall be
managed in the light of objectives identified by mutual
agreement between the two parties, and the annual and multiannual
programming to attain them.
2. For the purposes of paragraph 1, as soon as this Protocol
enters into force and no later than three months after that date,
the Joint Committee shall agree on a multiannual sectoral
programme and detailed implementing rules covering, in
particular:
(a) annual and multiannual guidelines for using the part of the
financial contribution referred to in paragraph 1;
(b) the objectives, both annual and multiannual, to be achieved
with a view to securing a continuation, over time, of
responsible fishing and sustainable fisheries, taking
account of the priorities expressed by Greenland in its
national fisheries policy and other policies relating to or
having an impact on the continuation of responsible
fishing and sustainable fisheries;
(c) criteria and procedures for evaluating the results obtained
each year.
3. Any proposed amendments to the multiannual sectoral
programme must be agreed to by both Parties within the
Joint Committee.
4. Each year, Greenland shall allocate the part of the financial
contribution referred to in paragraph 1 with a view to implementing
the multiannual programme. For the first year of application
of the Protocol, that allocation shall be notified to the
Community at the same time as the notification takes place
for the following year. For each year thereafter, Greenland
shall notify the Community of the allocation no later than
1 December of the previous year.
5. Where the annual evaluation of the progress made in
implementing the multiannual sectoral programme so
warrants, the European Community may ask with the
approval of the Joint Committee for the application of the
financial contribution referred to in Article 2(1) of this
Protocol to be changed.
Article 5
Disputes - Suspension of application of the Protocol
1. Any dispute between the parties over the interpretation of
this Protocol or its application shall be the subject of consultations
between the Parties within the Joint Committee, in a
special meeting if necessary.
2. Without prejudice to Article 6 of this Protocol, application
of the Protocol may be suspended at the initiative of one Party
if the undertakings in this protocol in the opinion of this Party
have been seriously infringed by the other Party and if the
consultations held within the Joint Committee under
paragraph 1 have not resulted in an amicable settlement.
3. Suspension of application of the Protocol shall require the
interested Party to notify its intention in writing at least three
months before the date on which suspension is due to take
effect.
4. In the event of suspension, the Parties shall continue to
consult with a view to finding an amicable settlement to their
dispute. Where such settlement is reached, application of the
Protocol shall resume and the amount of the financial contribution
and fishing opportunities shall be reduced proportionately
and pro rata temporis according to the period during
which application of the Protocol was suspended.
Article 6
Suspension of application of the Protocolon grounds of
non-payment
If the Community fails to make the payments provided for in
Article 2 of this Protocol, application of the Protocol may be
suspended on the following terms:
(a) The competent authorities of Greenland shall notify the
Community authorities of the non-payment. The latter
shall make the necessary verifications and, where
necessary, transmit the payment within no more than 30
working days of the date of receipt of the notification;
(b) If no payment is made and non-payment is not adequately
justified within the period provided for in point (a) above,
the competent Greenland authorities shall be entitled to
suspend application of the Protocol. They shall inform the
Community authorities of such action forthwith;
(c) Application of the Protocol shall resume as soon as the
payment concerned has been made.
Article 7
Mid-term review
If one of the Parties so requests during 2009, the application of
Articles 1, 2 and 4 of the present Protocol shall be reviewed
before 1 December of that year. On that occasion the Parties
may agree to amend the present Protocol regarding in particular
the indicative quotas set out in Chapter I of the Annex hereto,
the financial arrangements and the provisions of Article 4.
Article 8
Entry into force
This Protocol with its Annex shall apply with effect from
1 January 2007.



ANNEX
CONDITIONS GOVERNING FISHING ACTIVITIES BY COMMUNITY VESSELS IN THE GREENLANDIC EEZ
CHAPTER I
INDICATIVE CATCH OPPORTUNITIES 2007-2012 AND BY-CATCHES
1. Level of fishing opportunities authorised by Greenland
2. By-catch limits
Community fishing vessels operating in the Greenlandic EEZ shall abide by the applicable by-catch rules, both for
regulated and non-regulated species. Moreover, it is prohibited in the Greenlandic EEZ to discard regulated species.
By-catches are defined as any catches of species not covered by the vessel's target species indicated on the licence.
The maximum quantities which may be taken as by-catch are authorised when issuing the licence for target species.
The maximum quantity of each regulated species which may be caught as by-catch will be indicated on the licence
issued.
By-catches of regulated species will be counted against the by-catch reserve set aside as part of the fishing possibilities
of the relevant species allocated to the Community. By-catches of non-regulated species will be counted against the bycatch
reserve of non-regulated species set aside for the Community.
A licence fee shall not be paid for by-catches. However, in the case where a Community fishing vessel exceeds the
maximum authorised quantity of by-catch of regulated species, a penalty shall be imposed amounting to three times
the normal license fee for that species as regards the quantity in excess of the maximum by-catch allowed.
CHAPTER II
APPLICATION FOR AND ISSUE OF LICENCES
1. Only eligible vessels may obtain a licence to fish in the Greenlandic EEZ.
2. For a vessel to be eligible, neither the owner, the master nor the vessel itself must be prohibited from fishing in the
Greenlandic EEZ. They must be in order with the Greenland authorities insofar as they must have fulfilled all prior
obligations arising from their fishing activities in Greenland or within the Greenlandic EEZ under the fisheries
agreements concluded with the Community.
3. The fisheries licence applications and issuing formalities referred to in Article 1, paragraph 3 of the Agreement are set
out in the administrative arrangement in Appendix 1.
CHAPTER III
FISHING ZONES
The fishery shall take place within the fishing zone as defined as the Greenland Exclusive Economic Zone as provided for
in the Regulation No 1020 of 15 October 2004 in accordance with Royal Decree No 1005 of 15 October 2004 on the
Entry Into Force of Act on Exclusive Economic Zones for Greenland entering into force Act No 411 of 22 May 1996 on
Exclusive Economic Zones.
The fishery shall take place at least 12 nautical miles off the base line according to paragraph 7, Section 2 of Act No 18
of 31 October 1996 on Fisheries issued by the Landsting of Greenland as most recently amended by the Landsting Act
No 28 of 18 December 2003 unless specifically provided otherwise.
The baselines are defined in accordance with Royal Decree No 1004 of 15 October 2004 on Amendment of Royal
Degree on Delimitation of the territorial Waters of Greenland.
CHAPTER IV
ADDITIONAL CATCH POSSIBILITIES
The Greenland authorities shall offer the Community authorities any additional catch possibilities as referred to in Article
7 of the Agreement, in accordance with Article 1(6) of the Protocol.
The Community authorities shall inform the Greenland authorities of its reaction to the offer no later than six weeks after
receipt of the offer. If the Community authorities either decline the offer or do not react within six weeks, the Greenland
authorities shall be free to offer the additional catch possibilities to other parties.
CHAPTER V
ARRANGEMENTS FOR CATCH REPORTING, TECHNICAL CONSERVATION MEASURES AND OBSERVER SCHEME
1. Community fishing vessels shall be provided with a set of relevant parts of Greenlandic legislation in English for
conditions regarding catch reporting, technical conservation measures and observer scheme.
2. Masters of Community fishing vessels shall keep on board a logbook in which they must record their activities in
accordance with the rules provided for under Greenlandic law.
3. Fishing activities shall be carried out in accordance with the technical conservation measures as set out under
Greenlandic law.
4. Any fishing operations in the Greenlandic EEZ are subject to the observer scheme provided for under Greenlandic law.
Masters of Community fishing vessels shall cooperate with the Greenland authorities for the purpose of embarking of
observers on board in the ports designated by the Greenland authorities.
CHAPTER VI
VMS
The conditions concerning VMS are laid down in Appendix 2.
CHAPTER VII
TEMPORARY JOINT VENTURES
The conditions concerning access to resources of Temporary Joint Ventures are laid down in Appendix 3.
CHAPTER VIII
EXPERIMENTAL FISHERIES
The conditions concerning Experimental Fisheries are laid down in Appendix 4.
CHAPTER IX
MONITORING
When the competent authorities establish that there has been a violation of Greenlandic law by a master of a Community
fishing vessel, notice thereof shall be sent as soon as possible to the European Commission and the flag Member State.
The notice shall contain information concerning the name of the vessel, register number, call signal and the names of the
vessel owners and master of the vessel. Furthermore, the notice shall contain a description of the circumstances leading to
the violation and shall specify any sanctions applied.
The Commission shall provide the Greenland authorities with a list of the competent authorities in the Member States as
well as a regular update of this list.
Appendices
(1) Administrative Arrangement on licences. Conditions for the exercise of fishing activities by Community vessels in the
Greenlandic EEZ.
(2) Conditions On Issues related to Satellite Tracking of Fishing Vessels.
(3) Conditions relating to Temporary Joint Ventures.
(4) Details of implementation for experimental fisheries.
