AGREEMENT ESTABLISHING THE PEPPER COMMUNITY
PREAMBLE
THE CONTRACTING PARTIES TO THIS AGREEMENT,
CONVINCED that the present situation of and future outlook
for pepper (piper nigrum) necessitates their joining together and
developing a well-planned programme of concerted action to solve
their common problems and to enable them to obtain ths benefits of
co-operation in the areas of production, research and marketing,
RECOGNIZING that the formation of an organization among
the producing countries having a substantial interest in the production
and marketing of pepper is a necessary and effective instrument
for implementation of the basic strategy of plan harmonization and
co-operation on a commodity basis for achieving accelerated development
of their economies,
BELIEVING that such a grouping is in accordance with the
principle endorsed by the United Nations Economic Commission for
Asia and the Far East at its twenty-third and twenty-fourth sessions
held in 1967 and 1968, by the United Nations Economic and Social
Council at its forty-third and forty-fifth sessions, by the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development in General Principle Ten of
the Final Act of its first session in 1964, and by the declaration of
the United Nations General Assembly at its 1883rd plenary meeting
on International Development Strategy for the Second Development
Decade^
REALIZING that the co-ordination of national efforts among the
producing countries that could be effected by such an organization
would lead to better utilization of resources and yield quicker results,
and
RECOGNIZING that such an organization would be of immense
value in the mobilization of resources to improve the pepper economy
and promote its rapid development,
HAVE RESOLVED to combine their efforts and have agreed
as follows:
Article 1
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COMMUNITY
There shall be established an organization to be known as
"The Pepper Community" (hereinafter called the Community) having
the membership, functions and powers hereinafter prescribed*
Article 2
MEMBERSHIP
1. Initially the Community shall consist of the Contracting Parties
only, namely, India, Indonesia, Malaysia
2, Other Pepper producing countries may apply to become members
of the Community and may become members on the unanimous decision
Of the then existing members of the Community and by accession to
this Agreement.
Article 3
OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS
The functions of the Community shall be to promote, co-ordinate
and harmonize all activities relating to the pepper economy with a
view to achieving the following broad objectives:
(1) To co-ordinate and stimulate research on technical and
economic aspects of production, including research on
diseases affecting the pepper plant, research on development
of disease-resistant and high-yielding varieties;
(2) To facilitate the exchange of information on programmes
and policies>> and on any other aspects relating to production;
(3) To develop programmes for increasing consumption in
traditional and new markets, including programmes of
co-operation in promotion activities;
2
(4) To intensify and co-ordinate research on new uses of
pepper;
(5) To further joint action for the relaxation of tariff and
non-tariff barriers and for the removal of other obstacles
to trade;
(6) To co-ordinate standards of quality so as to facilitate
international marketing;
(7) To keep under constant review developments relating to
supply, demand and prices of pepper;
(8) To carry out investigations into the causes and consequences
of fluctuations in the price of pepper and suggest
appropriate solutions;
(9) To improve statistical and other information on pepper
production, consumption, trade and prices, including techniques
of production and consumption forecasting; and
(10) To undertake such other activities and functions as may
be deemed desirable in the interests of the world pepper
economy,,
Article 4
RELATIONSHIP WITH UNITED NATIONS ORGANIZATIONS
The Community shall maintain close relations with United Nations
bodies and the specialized agencies. In carrying out its functions in
any aprticular field the Community may consult, co-operate with and
seek assistance from the United Nations bodies or specialized agencies
having particular responsibility in that field.
Article 5
ORGANIZATION
1. Each member State shall be represented in the Community by
one representative with plenipotentiary authority and may if it so desires
also appoint one or more alternates, A member State may also
designate one or more advisers to accompany its representative or
alternate.
2. The chairmanship of the Community shall be fc Id in turn by the
representatives of member States in the alphabet: il order of the
member States. Each representative shall hold office for one year.
3. The Community shall be serviced by a secretariat comprised
of a Director and such other staff as the Community may decide.
The Director and other staff shall be selected and appointed by the
Community to hold office for a period and on terms and conditions
established by the Community.
4. Pending the establishment of the secretariat, the Community
may request the secretariat of the United Nations Economic Com*
mission for Asia and the Far East to provide secretariat assistance
to service the Community.
5. The Community shall submit reports on its activities not less
than once a year to the Governments of member States.
Article 6
MEETINGS OF THE COMMUNITY
1. Subject to the provisions of this Agreement, the Community
shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
2. The Community shall meet as often as necessary but in any
case not less than once in each calendar year. In addition, the Community
shall meet if a request to that effect is made in writing to the
Director by any two members of the Community. The Director shall
be responsible for convening all meetings of the Community.
3. Decisions of the Community shall be by majority vote of the
members present. No decision shall be given effect to unless: (a)
members voting represent not less than eighty five per cent of the
quantum of production of the Community or, (b) members voting
represent not less than seventy five per cent of the quantum of export
of the Community (average production and exports of the preceding
four years).
Article 7
OBSERVERS
The Community may invite representatives of Governments
of non-member States and of United Nations bodies and specialized
agencies and of other organizations to attend meetings of the Community
in the capacity of observers without the right to vote.
Article 8
FINANCE
The administrative and operational expenses as approved by the
Community shall be met by contributions from member States on the
following basis: fifty per cent to be shared equally, twenty five per
cent on the basis of quantum of production and the remaining twenty
five per cent on the basis of quantum of exports (average production
and exports of the preceding four years),,
Article 9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1. Subject to the provisions of this Agreement the Community
shall adopt- such regulations, including financial and staff regulations*
as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this Agreement.
2. The Community shall be a separate legal entity with the capacity
to contract and the right to acquire, hold and dispose of property.
Article 10
SIGNATURE
The original of this Agreement in a single copy in the English
language shall remain open for signature, by the duly accredited
representatives of the Contracting Parties, at the United Nations
Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East in Bangkok from
16 April 1971 to 31 August 1971. This Agreement shall thereafter be
transmitted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations.
Article 11
RATIFICATION
This Agreement shall be subject to ratification or acceptance
by the signatory Governments in accordance with their respective
constitutional procedures.
Instruments of ratification or acceptance shall be deposited with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations not later than 31 March
1972.
Article 12
ENTRY INTO FORCE
This Agreement shall enter into force between those Contracting
Parties which have deposited instruments of ratification or acceptance
when not less than three of them have deposited such instruments.
Article 13
ACCESSION
Other pepper producing countries may accede to this Agreement
in accordance with the provisions of article 2(2). Instruments of
accession shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the united
Nations.
Article 14
VOLUNTARY WITHDRAWAL
After this Agreement has entered into force a member State
may withdraw voluntarily from the Agreement by giving written
notice of withdrawal simultaneously to the Community and the Secretary-
General of the United Nations. Withdrawal shall become effective ninety
days after the notice is received by the Secretary-General of the United
Nations.
Article 15
AMENDMENT
The Community may, by a unanimous vote of the members
present and voting, amend the provisions of this Agreement. The
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be notified forthwith
of any such amendment.
Article 16
NOTIFICATIONS BY THE SEC RETAR Y-GENE RAL OF THE
UNITED NATIONS
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall notify the
Contracting Parties of each deposit of an instrument of ratification,
acceptance or accession and of the date on which this Agreement
enters into force.
In witness whereof the undersigned, having been duly authorized
to this effect by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement
on the dates appearing opposit their signatures.
The original of this Agreement and any amendments thereto
shall be deposited in the archives of the United Nations and the
Secretary-General of the United Nations shall transmit certified copies
thereof to each signatory and acceding Government.
