SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
RUSSIAN FEDERATION ON COOPERATION IN THE PEACEFUL USES
OF NUCLEAR ENERGY OF 3 SEPTEMBER 1996
The Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the Government of the Russian Federation together hereinafter referred
to as "the Parties"
Desiring to supplement the areas of cooperation implemented in the
framework of the Agreement between the Government of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the Russian Federation
on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses ofNuclear Energy of 3 September 1996 1
•
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
1. The British Party shall render free technical assistance to the Russian Party
in the form of financial means and associated services, equipment and material in
order to contribute to an early, environmentally safe and cost-effective dismantling
of Russian nuclear-powered submarines withdrawn from the Navy's service in the
northern region of the Russian Federation, including the management of spent
nuclear fuel and radioactive waste which is formed thereby and in other areas of
nuclear cooperation as provided for in Article 2.
2. The Russian Party shall use the free technical assistance provided by the
British Party exclusively for the purposes listed in paragraph 1 of this Article.
ARTICLE2
1. The Parties shall cooperate in the following areas:
a) Unloading spent nuclear fuel from reactors of nuclear submarines
withdrawn from service with the Russian Navy;
b) Dismantling nuclear submarines withdrawn from service with the
Russian Navy;
c) Management of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste and
rehabilitation of radiation dangerous objects; and
d) other activities connected with the execution of the work referred to
in paragraph 1 (a), (b) and ( c) of this Article.
2. If both Parties agree, other areas of cooperation may be added to those
listed in paragraph 1 of this Article.
ARTICLE3
1. The Executive Authorities responsible for the implementation of this
Supplementary Agreement shall be:
for the Russian Party - the Ministry of the Russian Federation for
Atomic Energy
for the British Party - the Department of Trade and Industry of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
2. Fulfilment of the cooperation envisaged by this Supplementary Agreement
shall be by means of specific arrangements, including contracts (hereinafter
referred to as "Subsidiary Arrangements"), made between entities which are
established in either of the two countries, whether companies, enterprises, research
organisations, government bodies of either Party or any other juridical person or
juridical body of persons (hereinafter referred to as "participants").
3. The Subsidiary Arrangements referred to in paragraph 2 above are subject
to approval by the Executive Authorities.
ARTICLE4
1. A Coordination Committee shall be established by the Executive
Authorities, which will be responsible for:
a) reviewing progress with the implementation of this Supplementary
Agreement.
b) resolving any disputes which may anse m regard to this
Supplementary Agreement.
c) preparing when necessary recommendations on changes and
additions to this Supplementary Agreement.
2. Each Party shall appoint a Co-Chairman to the Coordination Committee.
Each Party shall inform the other Party in writing of the appointment of its CoChairman
within 60 days of the entry into force of this Supplementary Agreement.
The Coordination Committee will define its own rules and procedures. Decisions
by the Coordination Committee shall be taken by agreement.
ARTICLES
Cooperation within the framework of this Supplementary Agreement shall
be carried out in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Parties, as well as
international agreements to which the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and Russian Federation are parties and taking into account
internationally recognised principles and recommendations for nuclear and
radiation safety and environmental protection.
ARTICLE 6
1. The British Party shall according to established procedures provide
financial means and associated services, equipment and material to Russian
participants within the framework of this Supplementary Agreement in accordance
with the provisions of the Subsidiary Arrangements.
2. The Russian participants shall receive the financial means and associated
services, which are provided by the British Party in accordance with Article 1,
paragraph 1 of this Supplementary Agreement according to procedures established
in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Russian Federation and shall use
them exclusively for the purposes specified in Article 1, paragraph 1, of this
Supplementary Agreement.
3. The Russian Party shall ensure that the free technical assistance provided by
the British Party is used for the realisation of cooperation in the areas listed in
Article 2 of this Supplementary Agreement.
4. The design, construction, delivery and commissioning of technical means
and objects financed by funds provided by the British Party shall be conducted in
accordance with the laws and regulations of the Russian Federation. The procedure
for execution of work shall be prescribed by the Subsidiary Arrangements.
5. The Parties shall mutually provide effective protection of intellectual
property rights in accordance with the laws and regulations of the Parties, and in
accordance with international agreements to which the Russian Federation or the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland are Parties.
ARTICLE 7
1. The Parties shall take all measures within their competence of an
administrative, fiscal and customs character which are necessary for the proper
implementation of this Supplementary Agreement in accordance with their laws
and regulations.
2. The Russian Party shall facilitate the entry into the territory of the Russian
Federation and exit of employees and personnel from the British Party and any
organisation taking part in cooperation in accordance with this Supplementary
Agreement.
3. Services, equipment and materials supplied by the British Party and
imported into the territory of the Russian Federation in accordance with this
Supplementary Agreement shall be regarded as free technical assistance in
accordance with Article 1 Paragraph 1 of this Supplementary Agreement, and be
exempt from taxes, customs duties and other charges in accordance with the
procedures established under the laws and regulations of the Russian Federation.
ARTICLE 8
1. Disagreements concerning the interpretation or implementation of this
Supplementary Agreement shall be resolved through consultations by the Coordination
Committee as set out in Article 4 of this Supplementary Agreement.
Consultations shall take place not later than 90 days after one of the Executive
Authorities has so requested.
2. In the case of any conflict between this Supplementary Agreement and
Subsidiary Arrangements concluded within the framework of this Supplementary
Agreement, the provisions of this Supplementary Agreement shall prevail.
ARTICLE9
1. At the request of either of the Parties, the Parties shall hold meetings or
consultations in order to examine the implementation of the Subsidiary
Arrangements concluded within the framework of this Supplementary Agreement.
2. The British Party shall have the right to verify and control that financial
means, services, equipment and materials provided free of charge to the Russian
Party as technical assistance are used in accordance with the terms of this
Supplementary Agreement. The procedure for verification and control shall be
established in the Subsidiary Arrangements concluded within the framework of this
Supplementary Agreement.
ARTICLE 10
1. In accordance with this Supplementary Agreement, information constituting
State secrets of the Russian Federation or classified as secret by the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland shall not be exchanged.
2 Information supplied within the framework of this Supplementary
Agreement may be treated as confidential by the Parties for the purposes of
preventing access to it by persons and organisations not participating in the
implementation of this Supplementary Agreement. Such information shall be
clearly defined and marked. Information shall be defined as confidential by the
Party supplying that information, in accordance with its laws and regulations. The
Party receiving such information shall treat it as confidential in accordance with its
laws and regulations.
3. Confidential information shall be handled in accordance with the laws and
regulations of the Party receiving that information. Such information shall not be
disclosed or transferred to any third party which is not participating in the
implementation of this Supplementary Agreement without the express agreement
of the Party supplying the information.
In accordance with the laws and regulations of the Russian Federation,
confidential information shall be treated as government information with restricted
circulation. Such information shall be afforded the appropriate protection.
In accordance with the laws and regulations of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, confidential information shall be treated as
information belonging to a foreign government, supplied in confidence. Such
information shall be afforded the appropriate protection.
4. Confidential information supplied within the framework of this
Supplementary Agreement shall be used exclusively for the purposes laid down in
this Supplementary Agreement, in accordance with the laws and regulations of the
Parties.
5. The number of persons having access to confidential information shall be
restricted to that which is necessary for the implementation of this Supplementary
Agreement.
ARTICLE 11
1. With the exception of claims for damage or mJury against individuals
arising from their premeditated actions, the Russian Party shall bring no claims or
legal proceedings against the British Party and its personnel or contractors,
subcontractors, consultants, suppliers of equipment or services at any tier and their
personnel, for damage to property owned by the Russian Federation. This
provision shall not apply to legal actions brought by the Russian Party to enforce
the provisions of contracts to which it or a Russian physical or legal entity is a
party.
2. With the exception of claims for damage or injury against individuals
arising from their premeditated actions, the Russian Party shall provide for the
necessary legal defence of, shall indemnify, and shall bring no claims or legal
proceedings against, the British Party and its personnel or contractors,
subcontractors, consultants, suppliers of equipment, materials or services at any tier
and their personnel if claims are made by a third party in any court or forum arising
from activities undertaken pursuant to this Supplementary Agreement for injury,
loss or damage occurring within or outside the territory of the Russian Federation
that results from a nuclear incident occurring within the territory of the Russian
Federation.
3. Without prejudice to paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, nothing in this
Article shall be interpreted as preventing legal proceedings or claims against
nationals of the Russian Federation or permanent residents within the territory of
the Russian Federation or against Russian legal entities.
4. The provisions of this Article shall not prevent indemnification by the
Parties for damage in accordance with their laws.
5. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as acknowledging the jurisdiction
of any court or forum outside the Russian Federation over third-party claims, to
which paragraph 2 of this Article applies, except as provided for in paragraph 10 of
this Article and in any other case where the Russian Federation has pledged itself to
acknowledge and execute a legal decision on the basis of provisions of
international agreements.
6. Nothing in this Article shall be construed as waiving any immunity which
the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland may enjoy with respect to potential third-party claims which may be
brought against either of the Parties.
7. The provisions of this Article shall, if so requested by the contractor, be
incorporated into Subsidiary Arrangements by the issue to the contractor, by or on
behalf of the Russian Party, of an indemnity confirmation letter. A standard form of
such indemnity confirmation letter is attached as an integral part of this
Supplementary Agreement.
8. In the event of a nuclear incident occurring within the territory of the
Russian Federation, which may give rise to fulfilment of obligations under this
Article, the Parties shall hold consultations upon request by one of the Parties.
9. In this Article the following terms shall have the following meanings:
Nuclear Incident:
Nuclear Damage:
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Any occurrence or series of occurrences having the same
origin which causes Nuclear Damage.
loss of life, any personal injury or any loss of, or damage to,
property which arises out of or results from the radioactive
properties or a combination of radioactive properties with
toxic, explosive or other hazardous properties of nuclear fuel
or radioactive products or waste in, or of nuclear material
coming from, originating in, or sent to, a nuclear installation;
any other loss or damage so arising or resulting if and to the
extent that the law of the competent court so provides; and
if the law of the State in which the nuclear installation of the
liable operator is situated so provides, loss of life, any
personal injury or any loss of, or damage to, property which
arises out of or results from other ionising radiation emitted
by any other source of radiation inside a nuclear installation.
10. As regards its obligations in this Article to contractors, subcontractors,
consultants, suppliers of materials and equipment and any services connected
therewith and their personnel, the Russian Party undertakes to have any conflicts,
disputes or claims, if a settlement is not reached within 90 days, referred to and
finally resolved by arbitration in accordance with the UNCITRAL Arbitration
Rules.
1 1. Any payments related to the indemnification in paragraph 2 of this Article
shall be made promptly and shall be freely transferable to the beneficiary in its
national currency.
12. The obligations concerning liability for damage undertaken by the Russian
Party in accordance with this Article shall be valid in respect of any equipment,
technology or facilities which are the subject of cooperation under this
Supplementary Agreement and shall remain in effect regardless of any transfer of
ownership of such items, termination of this Supplementary Agreement or expiry
of its validity.
ARTICLE 12
This Supplementary Agreement shall not affect the rights or obligations of
the Parties under other international agreements to which the Russian Federation
and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland are parties at the
time of signing this Supplementary Agreement.
ARTICLE 13
1. This Supplementary Agreement shall be provisionally applied from the date
of signature and shall enter into force 30 days after the date of receipt of the last
written notification of the Parties of the completion of the constitutional procedures
necessary for its entering into force. This Supplementary Agreement shall remain
in force until it is terminated in accordance with paragraphs 2 or 3 of this Article.
2. Either Party may terminate this Supplementary Agreement or its provisional
application by notifying the other Party of its intention in writing through
diplomatic channels. In this case this Supplementary Agreement or its provisional
application shall be terminated on the date of receipt of such notification by the
other Party after six months.
3. In the event of the termination of the Agreement between the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government
of the Russian Federation on Co-operation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy,
3 September 1996, this Supplementary Agreement shall also terminate on the same
date unless otherwise agreed in writing by the Parties.
4. The Parties may make changes and additions to this Supplementary
Agreement by written agreement.
5. After termination of this Supplementary Agreement in accordance with
paragraph 2 or paragraph 3 of this Article or of the provisional application of this
Supplementary Agreement:
a) the provisions of any Subsidiary Arrangements concluded within the
framework of this Supplementary Agreement which relate to works
which have not been finished shall continue to be valid;
b) the provisions of paragraph 5 of Article 6 and Articles 10 and 11 of
this Supplementary Agreement shall continue to be valid unless the
Parties agree otherwise in writing;
c) where the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear
Damage of 21 May 1963 1 (hereinafter referred to as the "Vienna
Convention") and the Joint Protocol relating to the Application of
the Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention of 2 1 September
19882 (hereinafter referred to as the "Joint Protocol") have both
come into force for the Russian Federation, and the Vienna
Convention, the Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of
Nuclear Energy of 29 July 19603 (the Paris Convention) and the
Joint Protocol have both come into force for the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the British Party may, in its
discretion and by notice in writing to the Russian Party, terminate
the application of paragraphs 2 and 7 of Article 11 of this
Supplementary Agreement with respect to any activity undertaken
pursuant to the Agreement to which these instruments apply. Each
Party shall inform the other in writing of the dates upon which such
instruments come into force in their respective territories.
Done in duplicate at London on 26 June 2003 m the English and Russian
languages, both texts being equally authoritative.
For the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland:
JACK STRAW
For the Government of the
Russian Federation:
IVANOV




ANNEX TO THE SUPPLEMENTARY AGREEMENT TO THE
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND AND THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE RUSSIAN FEDERATION ON COOPERATION
IN THE PEACEFUL USES OF NUCLEAR ENERGY OF 3 SEPTEMBER
1996.
Model of INDEMNITY CONFIRMATION LETTER
to be provided by
The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy
to [Contractor]
Dear Sirs,
The Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland are Parties to a
Supplementary Agreement to the Agreement between the Government of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the Government of the
Russian Federation on Cooperation in the Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy of 3
September 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the "Supplementary Agreement").
The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy, acting on behalf
of the Government of the Russian Federation hereby acknowledges that
[Contractor] has entered into a "Subsidiary Arrangement" as provided for by
paragraph 2 of Article 3 of the Supplementary Agreement with [Recipient] on
[date] to undertake activities pursuant to the Supplementary Agreement. The
persons and entities identified in the attached list are the [Contractor's] personnel,
subcontractors, suppliers, subsuppliers and consultants who will be providing
equipment, goods or services pursuant to the Subsidiary Arrangement. [Contractor]
may amend this list, upon agreement to the Ministry of the Russian Federation for
Atomic Energy or its authorised representative for the implementation of the
Subsidiary Arrangement.
The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy, acting on behalf
of the Government of the Russian Federation, confirms that in accordance with
paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 11 of the Supplementary Agreement,
a) with the exception of claims for damage or injury against individuals
arising from their premeditated actions, the Russian Party shall bring no claims or
legal proceedings against the British Party and its personnel or contractors,
subcontractors, consultants, suppliers of equipment or services at any tier and their
personnel, for damage to property owned by the Russian Federation. This provision
shall not apply to legal actions brought by the Russian Party to enforce the
provisions of contracts to which it or a Russian physical or legal entity is a party.
b) with the exception of claims for damage or injury against individuals
arising from their premeditated actions, the Russian Party shall provide for the
adequate legal defence of, shall indemnify, and shall bring no claims or legal
proceedings against the British Party and its personnel or contractors,
subcontractors, consultants, suppliers of equipment, materials or services at any tier
and their personnel if claims are made by a third party in any court or forum arising
from activities undertaken pursuant to this Supplementary Agreement for injury,
loss or damage occurring within or outside the territory of the Russian Federation
that results from a nuclear incident occurring within the territory of the Russian
Federation.
The Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy, acting on behalf
of the Government of the Russian Federation, agrees that any dispute, controversy
or claim arising out of or relating to this Indemnity Confirmation Letter, including
its existence or validity, shall be referred to and finally resolved by arbitration in
accordance with UNCITRAL Arbitration Rules if such dispute has not been
resolved amicably within 90 days of its submission to the Government of the
Russian Federation for resolution.
This Indemnity Confirmation Letter shall enter into force upon signature by
the Ministry of the Russian Federation for Atomic Energy, acting on behalf of the
Government of the Russian Federation and it shall remain in effect in accordance
with the Supplementary Agreement.
(Signature) (Title)
(Authorised representative of the Ministry of the Russian Federation for
Atomic Energy)
(Date)
Printed
