AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
POLISH PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC REGARDING FISHERIES IN
THE NORTHEASTERN PACIFIC OCEAN OFF THE COAST OF
THE UNITED STATES
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of the
Polish People's Republic,
Desiring to establish a rational regime for the conservation and management
of the fish stocks off the Pacific coast of the United States;
Recognizing the need to restore those stocks and to maintain them at maximum
sustainable yield;
Desiring to promote the objective of optimum utilization of those stocks in
accordance with the results of scientific research;
Taking into account anticipated legal and jurisdictional changes in the regime
of fisheries management based upon the consensus emerging from the Third
United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, and the need to implement
such changes according to certain principles having due regard for the interests
of the affected coastal and distant-water fishing nations;
Aware that, since 1973, Polish vessels and nationals have habitually fished
in particular areas of the Northeastern Pacific Ocean off the coast of the United
States,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I. The basic purposes of this Agreement are to:
(a) ensure effective conservation and rational management of the fisheries of
common concern off the coast of the United States in the Northeastern
Pacific Ocean;
(b) establish a common understanding of the principles which will form the basis
for future cooperation between the two Governments regarding those fisheries;
and
(c) provide solutions to current problems in those fisheries.
Article 2. 1. It is agreed that the following principles will be applied in
order to adjust future fishing by nationals and vessels of Poland off the Pacific
coast of the United States without prejudice to special principles applicable to
certain species, including anadromous species and highly migratory species:
(a) the establishment of a rational conservation regime based on the best available
scientific evidence;
(b) the determination of allowable catch and other conservation measures by the
United States, after consultations with the affected States, including Poland
in appropriate cases, on the basis of maximum sustainable yield as qualified
by relevant environmental and economic factors;
(c) the implementation of preferential harvesting rights for United States fishermen
based on their capacity to harvest the living resources;
(d) the implementation of an allocation system based on the principle of optimum
utilization;
(e) allocation among foreign States of that part of the allowable catch in excess
of United States harvesting capacity, taking into account, inter alia, the need
to minimize economic dislocation in States whose nationals have habitually
fished in the area and their cooperation during such time with respect to the
conservation of the resources;
(f) the establishment of more effective enforcement procedures including greater
participation by the United States;
(g) the implementation of a standardized system for collection of relevant
statistical information; and
(h) the implementation of arrangements to resolve gear conflicts and to ensure
adequate compensation to United States fishermen.
2. In cases where the full initial implementation of United States preferential
harvesting rights in a single year would result in severe economic hardship for
Poland and its nationals, the United States will consider arrangements for the
phased implementation of these preferential harvesting rights over a period of
two or three years, in the context of generally satisfactory arrangements, provided
that no adverse effects on the conservation of the stocks concerned will result.
Article 3. 1. The Government of the United States of America and the
Government of the Polish People's Republic consider it desirable to expand
research pertaining to the species of fish of interest to both Parties. Such research
will be conducted according to national programs as well as mutually agreed
research programs.
2. The competent agencies of both Governments shall ensure the following:
(a) an annual exchange of scientific and statistical data and the results of fishery
research concerning the area covered by this Agreement and immediately
adjoining areas off the Pacific coast of North America. The biostatistical
data supplied by the Polish People's Republic will be in the same format as
the data supplied at the May, 1975, meeting between representatives of the
two Governments;
(b) to the extent possible, meetings of scientists of both countries as well as the
participation of the scientists of one country in fishery research conducted
by the vessels of the other country;
(c) a cooperative program through which the fisheries specialists of one country
shall be placed aboard fishing vessels of the other country for the purpose of
obtaining biostatistical data from catches obtained by using various fishing
methods; and
(d) a continuous exchange of scientific, technical and general fishery publications.
3. The Government of the Polish People's Republic will ensure the collection
of the following biostatistical data on the total catch (including by-catch)
of all species by vessel class for fisheries in the area covered by this Agreement
and immediately adjoining areas off the Pacific coast of North America:
(1) Preliminary monthly catch data will be sent within thirty (30) days of the
month of record. Each monthly submission will include catches by species
for each statistical area defined by the International North Pacific Fisheries
Commission.
(2) Final annual catch and effort statistics, by month, species, vessel size, and
30 minutes Latitude by one degree Longitude will be sent within 180 days
after the end of the year.
These data will be provided to the appropriate fisheries authorities of the United
States Government.
4. Each Government shall take the appropriate steps to assure cooperation
among appropriate institutions in the field of fishery research.
Article 4. Both Governments will take measures to assure that their citizens
and vessels will, in the waters covered by this Agreement, conduct their fishing
with due regard for the conservation of the stocks of fish.
Article 5. The Government of the Polish People's Republic will adopt the
measures necessary to ensure that nationals and vessels of Poland will:
(a) refrain from fishing in the Bering Sea east of the International Date Line
throughout the year, except in waters adjacent to the Aleutian Islands south
of 53030 ' North Latitude and west of 1750 West Longitude in the areas
defined below:
(1) between 175'00' West Longitude and 179000 ' East Longitude and seaward
of a limit of 20 nautical miles from the baseline from which the
United States territorial sea is measured;
(2) west of 179000 ' East Longitude and seaward of a limit of 12 nautical
miles from the baseline from which the United States territorial sea is
measured;
(b) refrain from fishing for Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) throughout the
year and return immediately to the sea, in a viable condition insofar as
possible, any salmon taken incidentally;
(c) refrain from fishing for Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis) throughout
the year and return immediately to the sea, in a viable condition insofar
as possible, any halibut taken incidentally. Polish fishing vessels will avoid
conducting fishing operations in areas where concentrations of Pacific halibut
are encountered;
(d) refrain from conducting specialized fisheries off the Pacific coast of the United
States for rockfish (Sebastes spp.), blackcod (Anoplopoma fimbria),
flounders and soles (Pleuronectidae and Bothidae), anchovy (Engraulis
inordax), Pacific mackerel (Scomber japonicus), herring (Clupea harengus)
and shrimp (Pandalidae). Polish fishing vessels will avoid conducting fishing
operations in areas where concentrations of these species are encountered;
(e) refrain from fishing in the Gulf of Alaska in the following times and areas:
(1) from February 16 to November 14 inclusive between 147000 ' West
Longitude and 157000 ' West Longitude;
(2) from January 1 to February 15 and from November 15 to December 31
inclusive, off Kodiak Island seaward of a limit of twelve nautical miles
from the baseline from which the United States territorial sea is
measured in the six areas bounded respectively by straight line
connecting in each of the following groups of coordinates in the order
listed:
(i) North Latitude West Longitude
57015 ' 154051'
56057 ' 154034 '
56021' 155040 '
56026 ' 155055 '
57015 ' 154051V
(ii) North Latitude West Longitude
56027' 154006 '
55046 ' 155027 '
55040' 155017 '
55048 ' 155000'
55054' 154055 '
56003 ' 154036 '
56003 ' 153045 '
56030 ' 153045 '
56030 ' 153049 '
56027 ' 154006 '
(iii) North Latitude West Longitude
56030 ' 153049 '
56030' 153000 '
56044' 153000 '
56057' 153015 '
56045 ' 153045 '
56030 ' 153049 '
(iv) North Latitude West Longitude
57005' 152052 '
56054 ' 152052 '
56046 ' 152037 '
56046 ' 152020 '
57019 ' 152020 '
57005' 152052 '
(V) North Latitude West Longitude
57035' 152003 '
57011' 151014 '
57019 ' 150057 '
57048 ' 152000 '
57035' 152003 '
(vi) North Latitude West Longitude
58000 ' 152000 '
58000 ' 150000 '
58012 ' 150000 '
58019' 151029'
58000 ' 152000 '
(3) from January I to May 31 and from August 10 to December 31 inclusive
off Unimak Island seaward of a limit of twelve nautical miles from the
baseline from which the United States territorial sea is measured in the
area between 163'04' West Longitude and 166000 ' West Longitude;
(4) from January 1 to February 15, and from December I to December 31
inclusive in the area between 140*00 ' West Longitude and 147'00 ' West
Longitude;
(f) refrain from fishing throughout the year in the waters off the coast of the
Pacific Northwest and California in the following areas:
(1) between 47'30 ' North Latitude and 48030 ' North Latitude; and between
48030 ' North Latitude and 48040 ' North Latitude east of 125040 ' West
Longitude;
(2) between 46014 ' North Latitude and 46056 ' North Latitude landward of the
isobath of 110 meters;
(3) off the Columbia River in an area bounded by straight lines connecting
the following coordinates in the order listed:
North Latitude West Longitude
46000 ' 124040 '
46020 ' 124020 '
47000' 124040 '
47000 ' 125020'
46020' 124050 '
46000 ' 124055 '
46000 ' 124040 '
(4) off the Klamath River in an area bounded by straight lines connecting
the following coordinates in the order listed:
North Latitude West Longitude
41037 '
41037 '
41020'
41020'
41037 '
124034 '
124030 '
124028 '
124032'
124034 '
(5) off California south of 38030 ' North Latitude;
(g) refrain from fishing from January 1 to May 31 and from November 1 to
December 31 inclusive between 47'30 ' North Latitude and 38030 ' North
Latitude;
(h) refrain from fishing with gear other than pelagic gear (true midwater trawls,
using trawl doors incapable of being fished on the bottom) in the area covered
by this Agreement;
(i) limit the total number of Polish fishing and processing vessels licensed to
operate in the Northeastern Pacific Ocean off the United States coast to not
more than twelve of which not more than eight will be present at any one
time in the area covered by this Agreement. Of the number of Polish
fishing and processing vessels which may be present, not more than seven
shall be present at any one time between 38030 ' North Latitude and 47'30'
North Latitude; not more than four will be present at any one time in the
Gulf of Alaska north of 54030 ' North Latitude between 132000 ' West Longitude
and 157000 ' West Longitude and north of 53000 ' North Latitude between
157&#186;00 ' West Longitude and 166&#186;00 ' West Longitude; and not more than four
will be present at any one time in the Northeastern Pacific Ocean and the
Bering Sea west of 166&#186;00 ' West Longitude.
(j) limit the catch of Pacific hake in the Northeastern Pacific Ocean off the
United States coast to a level not to exceed 26,000 metric tons. In this
connection nationals and vessels of Poland shall refrain from fishing in the
area between 38030 North Latitude and 47030 ' North Latitude landward
of 125'40 ' West Longitude (1) after the deployment of fishing and processing
vessels reaches a total of 936 vessel-days, or (2) when the catch by such
vessels reaches the agreed level of 26,000 metric tons, whichever occurs
first.
Article 6. Recognizing that some incidental catch of living resources of the
continental shelf may be unavoidable in directed fisheries for other species, the
Government of the Polish People's Republic, in order to protect and conserve
the living resources of the United States continental shelf, agrees to take
appropriate measures to:
(a) ensure that its nationals and vessels will:
(1) refrain from engaging in a directed fishery for any species of living
resources of the United States continental shelf. A list setting forth the
living resources of the United States continental shelf shall be provided
to the Government of the Polish People's Republic by the Government
of the United States of America. Such list may be amended if necessary
during the period of force of the Agreement;
(2) when engaged in fishing or in fishing support activities in waters over
the continental shelf of the United States, refrain from having on board
any continental shelf fishery resources taken on the continental shelf of
another country;
(3) avoid concentrations of living resources of the continental shelf and,
when a concentration of such resources is encountered in the course
of their fishing operations, take immediate steps to avoid the concentration
in future tows;
(4) when any incidental catch of living resources of the continental shelf is
taken, immediately return those resources to the sea with a minimum of
injury. The amount, species position, dates, type of gear, time gear on
bottom, and disposition of such incidental catch will be promptly recorded
in the vessel's fishing log book;
(5) allow and assist the boarding and inspection of their vessels using fishing
gear being towed in contact with the bottom by enforcement officers of
the United States for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this
Agreement;
(b) reduce the use by its nationals and vessels of fishing gear operated in contact
with the bottom in fisheries off the coast of the United States, and ensure
the substitution of such gear with gear which does not generally come into
contact with the bottom in normal use;
(c) collect data on the incidental catch and disposition of the living resources of
the continental shelf of the United States by its nationals and vessels, by
30 minute square graticules, by vessel class, on a haul-by-haul basis. Such
information shall be provided to the Director of the Northwest Region of the
United States National Marine Fisheries Service during the meetings provided
for in Article 8 of this Agreement.
Article 7. The Government of the United States of America and the Government
of the Polish People's Republic will take steps to minimize the possibility
of conflict between gear anchored in the sea and mobile fishing gear and to
investigate conflicts when they are reported. This will include:
(a) for the American side, with respect to fixed fishing gear, development and
use of improved marking and deployment practices, and to the extent possible
timely notification of known locations of concentrations of fixed fishing gear
by transmission of radio messages to the Polish fleet;
(b) for the Polish side:
(1) notice to American authorities of areas of concentration of the Polish
fishing fleet in the vicinity of locations of fixed gear. This notification
shall be accomplished in the form of a timely response to the fixed gear
notification by American authorities and shall include current locations of
the Polish fleet as well as inspection vessels;
(2) acknowledgment of receipt of the fixed fishing gear notifications
described in subparagraph (a) above;
(3) additional precautionary measures by Polish vessels to avoid fishing
operations that could damage the fixed gear set by United States fishermen,
including the requirement that Polish vessels at all times remain a
reasonable distance away from fixed gear areas to prevent damage to
fixed gear and interference with the setting or hauling of such gear;
(c) for both sides:
(1) if a vessel is operating near a fixed gear area in such a manner as to
indicate to competent authorities of either country that a conflict is likely
to occur, the above-mentioned authorities shall, with a view to facilitating
flag State corrective action, take prompt steps to prevent the potential
conflict. This will include, where possible, communicating information
and warnings concerning the potential danger to the vessels involved and
to any inspector of the other Government known to be in the vicinity
or a designated authority of the other Government. Upon receiving such
communications, the authorities shall promptly take appropriate action
to attempt to avoid the occurrence of a conflict. The vessels involved
should also communicate directly using the customary international radio
communication procedures;
(2) when a conflict has occurred, either side shall immediately notify the
appropriate authorities of the other side. Both sides shall ensure that
prompt and thorough investigations are made by appropriate inspectors
for their own side. These investigations should be made on the site of
the incident when possible. On a voluntary basis, the investigation may
be conducted jointly by inspectors of both sides. The invitation to the
inspector of the other side will be extended by the inspector of the flag
State upon the request of the master in charge of the fishing vessel
involved in the conflict. The results of these investigations shall be
provided to the United States-Polish Fisheries Board, in accordance
with Article 11, for use in case of a claim arising out of the conflict;
(d) United States fishery authorities and Polish fishery authorities will inform
each other of the location of items of fishing gear or other materials lost
overboard which constitute a danger to fishing operations on common fishing
grounds;
(e) the detailed provisions and procedures of Annex I shall be followed to the
extent possible in implementing the provisions of this Article.
Article 8. 1. Both Governments consider it useful to arrange:
(a) regular visits of representatives of the fisheries authorities of the two countries
to exchange information and discuss actual or potential problems concerning
the fishing grounds, questions relating to the operations of the fishing fleets,
and questions arising out of the application of the provisions of this Agreement;
such visits shall take place at the request of either side, and shall occur on
appropriate vessels of either side or at another mutually agreed location;
(b) mutual visits of representatives of fishermen's organizations of the two countries
on vessels operating in the Northeastern Pacific or at another mutually
agreed location.
2. Those participating in each visit shall prepare a brief report of their visit
in each case and submit it to the appropriate authorities of the two Governments.
Visits shall be arranged between the appropriate Regional Director of the National
Marine Fisheries Service in Seattle, Washington; Juneau, Alaska; or Terminal
Island, California, and the chiefs of the fishing fleets of the Deep Sea Fisheries
and Fishery Services Enterprise "Dalmor" in Gdynia, "Odra" in Swinoujscie,
or "Gryf' in Szczecin, as appropriate. Each side will inform the other side, at
least two weeks before the visit, of subjects it wishes to be discussed.
3. To facilitate communications for the purposes of this Agreement, each
side shall keep the other advised of the name and radio address of the appropriate
officials available in the Agreement area.
Article 9. The areas where Polish fishing vessels may conduct loading
operations in the waters of the nine-mile fishery zone contiguous to the territorial
sea of the United States of America shall be as follows:
(a) near Forrester Island, Alaska, in the waters bounded on the north by
54054 ' North Latitude, on the east by 133016 ' West Longitude, and on the
south by 54044 ' North Latitude;
(b) near Destruction Island, Washington, in the waters between 47036 ' North
Latitude and 47045 ' North Latitude.
Article 1O. The provisions of Annex II shall be applicable, on a voluntary
basis, for the purpose of ensuring the application of the Agreement, except where
enforcement is otherwise provided for in the Agreement. Nothing in this Article is
intended to modify the authority or procedures for enforcement of United States
law.
Article II. Both Governments agree that the activities of the nationals and
vessels of the parties to this Agreement shall come within the purview of the
United States-Polish Fisheries Board, established by the Agreement between the
Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Polish
People's Republic Regarding Fisheries in the Western Region of the Middle
Atlantic Ocean and Annex I thereto,' in accordance with the terms of said Annex.
Article 12. Nothing in this Agreement shall be interpreted as prejudicing
the views of either Government with regard to the principle of freedom of fishing
on the high seas.
Article 13. 1. This Agreement shall enter into force January 1, 1976,
and shall remain in force for a period of one year, unless terminated sooner by
either Party upon 30 days notice to the other.
2. In the event a new regime of fisheries management off the coast of the
United States becomes effective prior to the expiration of this Agreement, the
Government of the United States may give notice of termination of this Agreement,
which termination shall take effect not less than 60 days after the giving
of such notice.
3. Representatives of the two Governments shall meet prior to the expiration
or termination of this Agreement pursuant to paragraph 2 of this Article, for the
purpose of further negotiations to further the achievement of the objectives
and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned, being duly authorized for this
purpose, have signed this Agreement.
DONE in Washington, this 16th day of December, 1975, in duplicate in the
English and Polish languages, both texts being equally authentic.
For the Government of the United States of America:
Rozanne L. Ridgway
For the Government of Polish People's Republic:
J. Wiejacz

ANNEX I
MEASURES TO PREVENT FISHING CONFLICT IN THE WATERS OFF THE PACIFIC COAST
OF THE UNITED STATES
1. (a) This Annex applies to the waters off the Pacific coast of the United States.
(b) For purposes of this Annex,
"fishing vessel" means any vessel engaged in the business of catching fish;
"vessel" means any fishing vessel and any vessel engaged in the business of
processing fish or providing supplies or services to fishing vessels.
2. (a) Fishing vessels shall be registered and marked in order to ensure their
proper identification at sea in accordance with the regulations of each Government. The
competent authorities of each Government shall inform the competent authorities of the
other Government of the system of registration and marking used.
(b) Each fishing vessel shall carry on board an official document, issued by the
competent authority of its country, showing the name, if any, and description of the
vessel, its nationality, its registration letter or letters and number, and the name of the
owner or of the firm or association to which it belongs.
(c) Each fishing vessel shall carry a national flag in good condition to be shown at
the request of the competent authorities.
(d) The nationality of a fishing vessel shall not be concealed in any manner whatsoever.
3. (a) Subject to compliance with the International Regulations for Prevention of
Collisions at Sea,' all vessels shall conduct their operations so as not to interfere with
the operations of fishing vessels, or fishing gear.
(b) Vessels arriving on fishing grounds where fishing vessels are already fishing or
have set their gear for that purpose shall inform themselves of the position and extent of
gear already placed in the sea and shall not place themselves or their fishing gear so
as to interfere with or obstruct fishing operations already in progress.
(c) No vessel shall anchor or remain on a fishing ground where fishing is in progress
if it would interfere with such fishing unless required for the purpose of its own fishing
operations or in consequence of accident or other circumstances beyond its control.
(d) Except in cases of force majeure, no vessel shall dump in the sea any article
or substance which may interfere with fishing or obstruct or cause damage to fish, fishing
gear or fishing vessels.
(e) No vessel shall use or have on board explosives intended for the catching of fish.
(f) In order to prevent damage, fishing vessels engaged in trawling and other fishing
vessels with gear in motion shall take all practicable steps to avoid nets and lines or
other gear which is not being towed.
(g) (1) When nets belonging to different fishing vessels get foul of each other, they
shall not be severed without the consent of the parties concerned unless it is impossible
to disengage them by other means.
(2) When fishing vessels fishing with lines entangle their lines, the fishing vessel
which hauls up the lines shall not sever them unless they cannot be disengaged in any
other way, in which case any lines which may be severed shall where possible be
immediately joined together again.
(3) Except in cases of salvage and the cases to which the two preceding subparagraphs
relate, nets, lines or other gear shall not under any pretext whatever be cut,
hooked, held on to or lifted up except by the fishing vessel to which they belong.
(4) When a vessel fouls or otherwise interferes with gear not belonging to it, it
shall take all necessary measures for reducing to a minimum the injury which may result
to such gear. The fishing vessel to which the gear belongs shall, at the same time, avoid
any action tending to aggravate such damage.
4. With respect to nets, lines and other gear anchored in the sea, fishing vessels
shall comply with the rules set out below in this paragraph:
(a) fishing vessels operating gear anchored in the sea shall, when they are present, notify
approaching vessels of the position and extent of gear;
(b) fishing vessels using mobile gear shall:
(1) maintain a continuous visual and radar watch for markers indicating the position
and extent of gear anchored in the sea;
(2) avoid areas where gear is known to be anchored in the sea.
ANNEX II
SCHEME OF JOINT ENFORCEMENT BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND
THE POLISH PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC REGARDING FISHERIES IN THE NORTHEASTERN
PART OF THE PACIFIC OCEAN
Pursuant to Article 10 of the Agreement, the following are voluntary arrangements
for a joint enforcement scheme for the purpose of ensuring the application of the
Agreement.
1. Control shall be carried out by inspectors of the fishery control services of the
two Governments.
2. The ships used to carry the inspection officers may be either special inspection
vessels or fishing vessels. Notification of the names of the Polish ships and the
inspectors shall be provided on a timely basis to the Regional Directors of the Southwest,
Northwest, and Alaska Regions of the National Marine Fisheries Service, as
appropriate through Coast Guard radio stations San Francisco (NMC) or Kodiak (NOJ).
Agents of the National Marine Fisheries Service and officers of the United States Coast
Guard are the designated inspection officers and cutters of the United States Coast Guard
are the inspection vessels of the United States. The names of any additional inspection
vessels shall be provided on a timely basis to the chief of the Polish fisheries fleet.
Each side shall notify the other of the name and means for establishing radio communications
with an authority present in the area of the Agreement who will be authorized to
receive and respond to reports of violations of the provisions of this Agreement.
3. Each inspector shall carry a document of identity supplied by the authorities of
his Government.
of the apparent infringement until boarding of the vessel by an inspector or other authority
of a fishery control service of the flag State or until such other time as may be agreed.
(b) If an inspector is unable to communicate with the appropriate authorities within
a reasonable period of time, he shall complete the inspection, leave the inspected vessel
and communicate as soon as possible with those authorities.
(c) In any case, a copy report of the inspection, including details of the infringement,
shall be transmitted to the appropriate authority of the flag State.
7. Inspectors shall carry out their duties under these arrangements in accordance
with the rules set out in this Annex, but they shall remain under the operational control
of their national authorities and shall be responsible to them.
8. The inspector may, subject to any limitations that are imposed by both Governments
jointly, carry out such examination of the catch and fishing gear as he deems
necessary to establish whether or not the Agreement is being complied with. He shall
report any findings of violations to the authorities of the flag State of the inspected vessel
as soon as possible. The inspection of fish and fishing gear may be carried out on and
below the fishing decks of vessels of each country.
9. Each Government shall consider and act on reports of foreign inspectors under
these arrangements on the same basis as reports of national inspectors. The provisions of
this paragraph shall not impose any obligation on either Government to give the report of
a foreign inspector a higher evidentiary value than it would possess in the inspector's
own country. Each Government shall collaborate in order to facilitate judicial or other
proceedings arising from a report of an inspector under these arrangements.
10. Each Government will inform the other as soon as possible of any actions
taken with respect to fishing violations reported by the other Government.

AGREED MINUTES
1. The representatives of both Governments stated that their Governments
will take appropriate measures to ensure that their nationals and vessels will
not, in trawling for bottom fish, use liners of such mesh size as to retain immature
fish. The Government of the Polish People's Republic will also take appropriate
measures to ensure that its nationals and vessels engaging in the hake fishery
will use trawls with a mesh size, in any of the parts, of no less than 110 millimeters,
or 4.33 inches, stretched mesh, including one knot (two bars).
2. The representatives of both Governments agreed that with respect to
paragraph 2 (c) of Article 3, the participation of United States fishery scientists
aboard Polish fishing vessels may consist of either duly authorized Federal or
State scientists.
3. The Polish representative stated that, with respect to paragraph (i) of
Article 5, his Government would provide the United States Government with a
list of the twelve Polish vessels which will be licensed to fish in the Northeastern
Pacific Ocean, and further, that there would be no substitutions or
additions to the list during the period of force of the Agreement.
4. The United States representative indicated that, in view of the participation
of other nations in the fisheries covered by this Agreement and the need
for sound conservation practices to be extended to all of them on an equitable
basis, the United States would take into account, inter alia, the outcome of
negotiations with other affected nations when this Agreement is due to be
renegotiated upon its expiration.
5. The United States representative took cognizance of the Polish request
for port call privileges along the Pacific coast of the United States, and stated
that her Government would give consideration to the request.
6. The Polish representative stated that the Polish fishing fleet will not
conduct any fishing operations utilizing longline gear.
7. The Polish representative agreed that the Chief of the Polish Fishing
Fleet will notify United States fishery authorities (1) before beginning fishing
or fisheries support operations in the area covered by the Agreement, (2) prior
to entering the areas provided in Article 9 to conduct loading operations, and
(3) daily to advise of current positions of all Polish vessels in the area covered
by the Agreement.
8. The representatives of both Governments agreed that should it be
considered desirable to renegotiate or extend this Agreement for 1977, additional
closures and conservation measures necessary to protect the stocks during
periods of the year not covered by this Agreement might be considered and
included in any such extension or modification.
9. The representatives of both Governments indicated that they would give
appropriate consideration to facilitating the translation of fishery publications to
be exchanged under paragraph 2 (d) of Article 3 of this Agreement.
10. The Polish representative agreed with regard to paragraph (i) of Article
5 that the Polish fisheries vessels employed in the area covered by this
Agreement in 1976 will not exceed the average capacity of the Polish fisheries
vessels employed in this area in either 1974 or 1975.
11. The representatives of both Governments indicated their common understanding
that nothing in the present Agreement is intended to interfere with the
navigation of vessels not engaged in fishing activities through the areas covered
by this Agreement. Polish fishery vessels clearly in transit in the area covered
by this Agreement and reported to United States fishery authorities will not be
included as a fishery vessel under paragraph (i) of Article 5 of this Agreement.
12. In connection with paragraph (a) (1) of Article 6 of this Agreement,
the United States representative provided the following list of living resources
of the continental shelf to the Polish representative:
"COELENTERATA"
Bamboo Coral-Acanella spp.
Black Coral-Antipathes spp.
Gold Coral-Callogorgia spp.
Precious Red Coral-Corallium spp.
Bamboo Coral-Keratosis spp.
Gold Coral-Parazoanthus spp.
"CRUSTACEA"
Dungeness Crab--Cancer magister
Tanner Crab-Chionoecetes angulatus
Tanner Crab-Chionoecetes bairdi
Tanner Crab-Chionoecetes opilio
Tanner Crab-Chionoecetes tanneri
Deep-sea Red Crab-Geryon quinquedens
American Lobster-Homarus americanus
Golden King Crab-Lithodes aequispinus
Stone Crab-Lithodes maia
Stone Crab-Menippe mercenaria
King Crab-Paralithodesb revipes
California King Crab--Paralithodes californiensis
King Crab-Paralithodesc amtschatica
King Crab-Paralithodesp latypus
California King Crab-Paralithodesr athbuni
MOLLUSKS
Ocean Quahog-Arctica islandica
Pink Abalone-Haliotis corrugata
Japanese Abalone-Haliotis kamtschatkana
Red Abalone-Haliotis rufescens
Surf Clam-Spisula solidissima
Queen Conch-Strombus gigas
SPONGES
Glove Sponge-Hippiospongia canaliculata
Sheepswood Sponge-Hippiospongia lachne
Yellow Sponge-Spongia barbera
Grass Sponge-Spongia graminea
