International Olive Oil And Table Olive Agreement 2005
PREAMBLE
The Parties to this Agreement,
Emphasizing that olive cultivation governs the existence and standard of living of millions of
families which are dependent on the measures taken to maintain and expand the consumption of
olive products and to enhance the world economy for such products,
Bearing in mind that the olive tree is a plant that is indispensable for the continuous
maintenance and conservation of soils, due to its perennial nature, and that it is also instrumental in
developing land that will not bear other crops and which, even under non-intensive farming
conditions, responds favourably to any improvement in cultivation,
Mindful that olive oil and table olives are essential basic commodities in the regions where
olive growing is established and that they are basic constituents of the Mediterranean diet and
recently also of other diets,
Bearing in mind that olive production is irregular, which gives rise to special difficulties that
may seriously harm the interests of producers and consumers and jeopardize general policies of
economic expansion in countries of the regions where olive growing is established,
Emphasizing in this connection the major importance of olive production to the economies of
many countries,
Mindful that the measures to be taken in the light of the particular characteristics of olive
growing and of the market for its products transcend the national sphere, and international action is
essential,
Being of the view that it is essential to continue and develop the work undertaken within the
framework of the previous agreements concluded since the 1956 Agreement until the 1986
Agreement, as amended in 1993, and that it is necessary to negotiate a new updated agreement in the
light of the changes in the industry,
Taking into account the provisions of the São Paulo Consensus of the eleventh session of
the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development,
Have agreed as follows:
9
CHAPTER I – GENERAL OBJECTIVES
Article 1
General objectives
The general objectives of this Agreement are indicated hereafter:
1. With respect to international technical cooperation:
- To foster international cooperation for the integrated, sustainable development of world
olive growing;
- To foster the coordination of production, industrialization, storage and marketing
policies for olive oils, olive-pomace oils and table olives;
- To encourage research and development and to foster the transfer of technology and
training activities in the olive products sector with the aim, inter alia, of modernizing olive
growing and the olive products industry and of improving the quality of production;
- To lay the foundations of international cooperation in international trade in olive oils,
olive-pomace oils and table olives to create, in this context, close cooperative ties with the
representatives of the various stakeholders of the olive products sector, in compliance with the
corresponding international agreements and accords;
- To further the efforts made and steps taken to improve and draw notice to product
quality;
- To further the efforts made and steps taken to improve the interaction between olive
growing and the environment, particularly with a view to protecting and conserving the
environment;
- To examine and foster the integral utilization of the products derived from the olive
tree;
- To conduct activities for the preservation of the gene sources of olive trees;
2. With respect to the standardization of international trade in olive products:
- To carry on conducting collaborative activities in the area of physico-chemical and
sensory testing in order to add to the knowledge of the composition and quality characteristics of
olive products, with a view to establishing international standards enabling:
. product quality control;
. fair international trading;
1 0
. protection of consumer rights;
. prevention of fraudulent practices.
- To facilitate the study and application of measures for harmonizing national and
international laws relating, in particular, to the marketing of olive oil and table olives;
- To encourage harmonization of the criteria for the definition of geographical
indications granted by the Members with a view to their international protection;
- To lay the foundations of international cooperation to prevent and, where appropriate,
to combat any fraudulent practices in international trade in any edible olive products by
establishing close cooperative ties in this context with the representatives of the various
stakeholders of the olive products sector.
3. With respect to the expansion of international trade and the promotion of olive products:
- To promote any activities conducive to the harmonious, sustainable expansion of the world
olive products economy by every means in the power of the International Olive Council in the fields
of production, consumption and international trade, having regard to the ways in which they are
interrelated;
- To facilitate the study and application of measures for balancing production and
consumption and the establishment of procedures for information and consultation in order to
enhance the transparency of the market;
- To implement measures designed to expand international trade in olive products and to
adopt whatever measures are appropriate to enhance the consumption of olive oil and table
olives;
- To undertake activities fostering a better understanding of the nutritional,
therapeutic and other properties of olive oil and table olives;
- To maintain and amplify the role of the International Olive Council as a meeting
point for all the operators in the sector and as a world documentation and information centre
on the olive tree and its products.
1 1
CHAPTER II – DEFINITIONS
Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Agreement:
1. “International Olive Council” means the international Organization referred to in article 3,
paragraph 1, established for the purpose of applying the provisions of this Agreement;
2. “Council of Members” means the decision-making organ of the International Olive Council;
3. “Member” means a Contracting Party to this Agreement;
4. “Olive oils” means the oils obtained solely from the fruit of the olive tree, to the
exclusion of oils obtained by solvent or re-esterification processes and of any mixture with oils
of other kinds;
5. “Table olives” means the product prepared from the sound fruits of varieties of the
cultivated olive tree which are chosen for their production of olives particularly suited to curing,
and which are suitably treated or processed and offered for trade and for final consumption;
6. “Olive products” means all edible olive products, in particular olive oils, olive-pomace
oils and table olives;
7. “Olive by-products” means, in particular, the products derived from olive pruning and the
olive products industry and the products resulting from alternative uses of the products of the
sector;
8. “Olive crop year” means the period from 1 October of each year to 30 September of the
following year.
1 2
PART ONE. INSTITUTIONAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER III – INTERNATIONAL OLIVE COUNCIL
SECTION I - ESTABLISHMENT, ORGANS, FUNCTIONS, PRIVILEGES
AND IMMUNITIES
Article 3
Establishment, headquarters and structure of the International Olive Council
1. The International Olive Council shall act through:
- its Chairperson;
- its Council of Members and, as the case may be, its committees and subcommittees;
- its Executive Secretariat;
in accordance with the provisions laid down in sections II to V.
2. The headquarters of the International Olive Council shall be in Madrid (Spain) unless the
Council of Members decides otherwise.
Article 4
Representation of the Members in the International Olive Council
1. Each Member shall designate its representative in the International Olive Council.
2. Any reference in this Agreement to a  "Government " or  "Governments " shall be construed as
including the European Community and any intergovernmental organization having responsibilities
in respect of the negotiation, conclusion and application of international agreements, in particular
commodity agreements. Accordingly, any reference in this Agreement to signature, ratification,
acceptance or approval, to notification of provisional application or to accession shall, in the case of
the European Community or such intergovernmental organizations, be construed as including a
reference to signature, ratification, acceptance or approval, to notification of provisional application
or to accession by the European Community or such intergovernmental organizations.
Article 5
Privileges and immunities
1. The International Olive Council shall have international legal personality. It shall, in
particular, have the capacity to contract, to acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property
and to institute legal proceedings. It shall not have the power to borrow money.
2. In the territory of each Member, and in so far as that Member's legislation allows, the
International Olive Council shall have the legal capacity necessary for the performance of the
functions conferred upon it by this Agreement.
3. For the purpose of its proper functioning, the status, privileges and immunities of the
1 3
International Olive Council, of its Executive Director, senior officials and other staff of its Executive
Secretariat, of experts and of the delegations of the Members in the territory of Spain shall be
governed by a Headquarters Agreement.
4. The Government of the State in which the headquarters of the International Olive Council is
situated shall, in so far as the legislation of that State allows, exempt the remuneration paid by the
International Olive Council to its employees and the assets, income and other property of the
International Olive Council from taxation.
5. The International Olive Council may conclude with one or more Members agreements
relating to such privileges and immunities as may be necessary for the proper application of this
Agreement.
SECTION II - COUNCIL OF MEMBERS
Article 6
Composition and functions
1. The Council of Members shall be composed of one delegate per Member. Furthermore,
each Member may appoint one or more alternates and one or more advisers to its delegate.
2. The Council of Members shall be the principal decision-making organ of the International
Olive Council. It shall exercise all such powers and perform or arrange for the performance of all
such functions as are necessary to achieve the objectives of this Agreement. The Council of
Members shall take any decisions, adopt any recommendations or make any suggestions
provided for, or envisaged in, this Agreement, unless powers or functions are explicitly vested in
the Executive Secretariat or the Executive Director.
Any decisions, recommendations or suggestions adopted in accordance with the
International Agreement which preceded this Agreement 1 and which are still in force at the time
of the entry into force of this Agreement shall continue to apply unless they are contrary to this
Agreement or they are repealed by the Council of Members.
3. The Council of Members shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement,
adopt:
(a) Rules of Procedure;
(b) Staff Regulations having regard to those applying to officials of similar
intergovernmental organizations;
1 International Agreement on Olive Oil and Table Olives, 1986, as amended and extended, 1993, and last
prolonged, 2004.
1 4
(c) An organization chart.
4. The Council of Members shall undertake or arrange for the undertaking of studies or
other work, including the collection of detailed information on the various kinds of aid for
activities relating to olive growing and olive products, so as to enable it to formulate any
recommendations and suggestions it may consider appropriate for achieving the general objectives
set forth in article 1. Any such studies and work shall, in particular, cover as many countries or
groups of countries as possible and take into account the general, social and economic conditions of
the countries concerned.
The Members shall inform the Council of Members, in accordance with a procedure
defined by the aforesaid Council, of the conclusions they reach after considering the
recommendations and suggestions arising from the application of this Agreement.
5. The Council of Members shall publish an annual report on its activities and on the
operation of this Agreement.
6. The Council of Members shall draw up, prepare and publish in the official languages of
the International Olive Council such reports, studies and other documents as it deems useful and
necessary, and shall keep up to date such records as it requires to perform its functions under this
Agreement.
Article 7
Sessions of the Council of Members
1. The Council of Members shall meet at the headquarters of the International Olive Council
unless it decides otherwise. If, on the invitation of any Member, the Council of Members decides to
meet elsewhere, that Member shall bear the extra expenditure this entails for the budget of the
International Olive Council over and above that incurred in holding a session at the headquarters.
2. The Council of Members shall hold a regular session at least once a year, in the autumn.
Any Member may authorize the delegate of another Member to represent its interests and to
exercise its right to participate in decisions of the Council of Members at one or more of its sessions.
Evidence of such authorization acceptable to the Council of Members shall be submitted thereto.
The delegate of a Member may not represent the interests or exercise the right to participate
in decisions of the Council of Members of more than one other Member.
3. The Council of Members may be convened at any time at the discretion of its Chairperson.
The Chairperson may also convene the Council of Members if so requested by various Members or
by one single Member supported by at least two other Members.
4. The expenses of delegations to the Council of Members shall be met by the Members
concerned.
1 5
5. Notice of any sessions provided for in paragraph 2 of this article shall be given at least 60
days before the date of the first meeting of each such session. Notice of the sessions provided for
in paragraph 3 of this article shall be given at least 21 days before the date of the first meeting of
each such session.
6. The quorum required for every session of the Council of Members shall be the presence
of the delegates of the majority of the Members holding at least 90 per cent of the total
participation shares allotted to the Members.
If this quorum does not exist, the session shall be postponed for 24 hours and the quorum
required shall be the presence of the delegates of the Members holding at least 85 per cent of the
total participation shares allotted to the Members.
7. The following may, with the prior consent of the Council of Members, attend as an
observer all or part of any of the sessions of the Council of Members:
(a) The international organizations and institutions referred to in article 14 of this
Agreement.
(b) The Government of any member or observer State of the United Nations or of one
of the organizations referred to in article 14 of this Agreement which envisages becoming a Party
to this Agreement, following written consultation between the date on which the notice of the
session is sent and the date on which the session is held.
Observers shall not be entitled to address the sessions of the Council of Members unless so
authorized by the Chairperson.
Article 8
Participation shares
1. The Members shall together hold 1,000 participation shares.
The participation shares shall be divided among the Members in proportion to the source
data of each Member, calculated according to the following formula:
q = p1 + e1 + p2 + e2
The parameters in this formula are averages expressed in thousands of metric tonnes, any
fraction of 1,000 tonnes above a whole number being disregarded. There may be no fractions of
participation shares.
q: source data used for proportionately calculating the participation shares
1 6
p1 average olive oil production of the last six olive crop years
e1: average (customs) olive oil exports of the last six calendar years corresponding to
the end years of the olive crop years considered for calculating p1
p2: average table olive production of the last six olive crop years converted into its
olive oil equivalent by the application of a conversion coefficient of 16 per cent
e2: average (customs) table olive exports of the last six calendar years corresponding
to the end years of the olive crop years considered for calculating p2, and
converted into their olive oil equivalent by the application of a conversion
coefficient of 16 per cent
2. However, no Member shall hold less than five participation shares. For that purpose, if
the calculation based on paragraph 1 should give a result of less than 5 participation shares for an
individual Member, that Member’s share shall be increased to five and the participation shares of
the other Members shall be decreased proportionately.
3. The Council of Members shall, at its annual session, adopt the participation shares
calculated under this article. Such distribution shall be in force for the following year.
4. The initial participation shares are contained in Annex A to this Agreement. They are
determined on the basis of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article in the light of the average of the data
for the last six olive crop years and calendar years for which final data are available. Each year
the Council of Members shall modify the shares as appropriate, in compliance with paragraphs 1,
2 and 3 of this article.
Article 9
Decisions of the Council of Members
1. Unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, decisions of the Council of Members shall
be taken by consensus of the Members within a time limit laid down by the Chairperson. Such
time limit may not exceed the duration of the session at which the draft decision is submitted to
the Council of Members.
If consensus is not reached within this time limit, Members shall take a vote.
2. Any decision shall be considered to be adopted when at least 50 per cent of the Members
accounting for 82 per cent of the participation shares are in favour thereof.
3. The Council of Members may take decisions by an exchange of correspondence between the
Chairperson and the Members without holding a session, provided that no Member objects to this
procedure.
1 7
The rules for the application of this consultation procedure shall be laid down by the
Council of Members in its Rules of Procedure.
Any decision so taken shall be communicated to all the Members by the Executive
Secretariat as quickly as possible and shall be entered in the final report of the following session of
the Council of Members.
SECTION III – CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON
Article 10
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
1. The Council of Members shall elect a Chairperson from among the delegations of the
Members. In the event of the Chairperson being the Head of Delegation, his or her right of
participation in decisions of the Council of Members shall be exercised by another member of his
or her delegation.
Without prejudice to the powers or functions vested in the Executive Director in, or in
accordance with, this Agreement, the Chairperson shall exercise the powers or functions set out
in this Agreement and further specified in the Rules of Procedure. Furthermore, the Chairperson
shall represent the International Olive Council legally and shall chair the sessions of the Council
of Members.
2. The Council of Members shall also elect a Vice-Chairperson from among the delegations
of the Members. In the event of the Vice-Chairperson being the Head of Delegation, the Vice-
Chairperson shall have the right to participate in decisions of the Council of Members except
when acting as Chairperson, in which case he or she shall delegate this right to another member
of his or her delegation.
The Vice-Chairperson shall replace the Chairperson in the event of his or her absence.
3. The Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson shall not receive any remuneration.
4. In the event of the temporary absence of both the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson or
of the permanent absence of one or both, the Council of Members shall elect new officers, temporary
or permanent as appropriate, from among the delegations of the Members.
SECTION IV – COMMITTEES AND SUBCOMMITTEES
1 8
Article 11
Financial Committee
1. The Council of Members shall establish a Financial Committee comprising one delegate
of each Member.
2. The Financial Committee shall be responsible for the financial control of the International
Olive Council and for the control of the application of chapter IV of this Agreement.
In this context, it shall be in charge of analyzing and studying the draft annual budgets of
the International Olive Council proposed by the Executive Secretariat. Only the draft budgets
resulting from the discussions of the Financial Committee shall be submitted to the Council of
Members for adoption.
The Financial Committee shall likewise be responsible for examining the accounts of the
International Olive Council in accordance with the provisions of article 18.
Each year, the Financial Committee shall submit the accounts for the preceding financial
year to the Council of Members for adoption at its annual session together with any other
measure dealing with financial matters.
3. Detailed rules for the application of these provisions shall be established and adopted by the
Council of Members in its Rules of Procedure.
Article 12
Other committees and subcommittees
1. The Council of Members may establish such committees and subcommittees as it deems
useful for assisting it in the exercise of its functions under this Agreement.
2. Detailed rules for the application of this provision shall be established and adopted by
the Council of Members in its Rules of Procedure. Such rules shall:
(a) ensure the fair allocation of the committee chairs among the different Members;
(b) establish the provisions governing the admission of observers to the meetings of
its committees and subcommittees.
SECTION V – EXECUTIVE SECRETARIAT
1 9
Article 13
Executive Secretariat
1. The International Olive Council shall have an Executive Secretariat comprising an Executive
Director, senior officials and such staff as are required to perform the tasks arising from this
Agreement. The posts of the Executive Director and of the senior officials shall be defined in the
Rules of Procedure adopted by the Council of Members.
2. The Council of Members shall appoint the Executive Director and senior officials on the
basis of the principle of proportionate alternation among the Members and of geographical
equilibrium.
The Council of Members shall fix their terms of appointment in the light of those
applying to corresponding officials of similar intergovernmental organizations. Their profile
shall be described in the Rules of Procedure.
3. The Executive Director shall be the chief administrative officer of the International Olive
Council. The Executive Director shall carry out his or her duties and take management decisions on
a collegiate basis with the senior officials.
4. The Executive Director shall appoint the staff in accordance with the Staff Regulations.
5. The Executive Director, the senior officials and the other members of the staff shall not carry
out any gainful activity in any of the various sectors of the olive-growing and olive-products
industry.
6. The Executive Director and the senior officials and staff shall not seek or receive instructions
regarding their duties under this Agreement from any Member or from any authority external to the
International Olive Council. They shall refrain from any action which might reflect on their position
as international officials responsible only to the Council of Members. Members shall respect the
exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Executive Director, senior officials
and staff and shall avoid influencing them in the discharge of their responsibilities.
2 0
SECTION VI – COOPERATION AND RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS
Article 14
Cooperation with other organizations
1. The International Olive Council shall make whatever arrangements are appropriate for
consultation or cooperation with the United Nations and its organs, in particular the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), the World Health Organization (WHO), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), the Joint FAO/WHO Programme of the Codex Alimentarius Commission,
the International Labour Organization (ILO), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) and other specialized agencies of the United Nations and with such
intergovernmental, governmental and non-governmental organizations as may be appropriate for the
olive sector and as may strive to provide funds to support the activities of the International Olive
Council for the benefit of all the Members.
2. The International Olive Council shall establish relations and draw up, as appropriate, special
collaborative agreements with international or regional organizations or institutions of a financial
nature, in particular with the Common Fund for Commodities.
Any collaborative agreement established between the International Olive Council and the
aforementioned international organizations or institutions shall receive the prior approval of the
Council of Members.
In respect of the implementation of any project under this article, the International Olive
Council shall not, in its capacity as an international commodity body, incur any financial obligation
for guarantees given by individual Members or other entities. No Member shall be responsible by
reason of its membership in the International Olive Council for any liabilities arising from borrowing
or lending by any other Member or entity in connection with such projects.
3. The International Olive Council shall, if necessary, keep UNCTAD informed of its
activities and programmes of work, bearing in mind the particular role of UNCTAD in
international commodity trade.
2 1
PART TWO. FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER IV – BUDGETS OF THE INTERNATIONAL OLIVE COUNCIL
Article 15
Budgets of the International Olive Council
1. The Council of Members shall adopt the following annual budgets to achieve the general
objectives laid down in chapter I of this Agreement:
. An administrative budget;
. A technical cooperation budget;
. A promotion budget.
2. The administrative budget shall be financed by the contributions of the Members and
by any other related revenues generated. The amount of the contribution of each Member
shall be established in proportion to its participation share as set in compliance with article 8
of this Agreement.
3. The technical cooperation budget shall be financed by:
(a) the amount of the contribution of each Member, which shall be established in
proportion to its participation share as set in compliance with article 8 of this Agreement;
(b) subsidies, voluntary contributions of the Members, which shall be governed by
the provisions embodied in an agreement established between the International Olive Council
and the donor Member, and donations; and
(c) any other related revenues generated.
4. The promotion budget shall be financed by:
(a) the amount of the contribution of each Member, which shall be established in
proportion to its participation share as set in compliance with article 8 of this Agreement;
(b) the voluntary contributions of the Members, which shall be governed by the
provisions embodied in an agreement established between the International Olive Council and
the donor Member;
(c) donations from Governments and/or other sources; and
(d) any other related revenues generated.
5. The International Olive Council may also receive other forms of supplementary
contributions, including services, scientific and technical equipment and/or staff that may meet
the requirements of approved programmes.
2 2
The International Olive Council shall, in addition, as part of the development of
international cooperation, endeavour to procure such essential financial and/or technical
assistance as may be obtainable from the competent international, regional or national
organizations, whether financial or of some other kind.
The above contributions shall be allocated by the Council of Members either to the
technical cooperation budget, or to the promotion budget, or to both budgets.
6. The amounts of the administrative budget, of the technical cooperation budget and of the
promotion budget that are not committed during one calendar year may be carried forward to the
following calendar years as advance financing of the corresponding budgets and shall be assigned
thereto according to the participation shares of each Member for the calendar year concerned.
Such amounts may not, under any circumstances, be transferred to other budgets unless
the Council of Members decides otherwise.
Article 16
Administrative funds
In addition to the budgets referred to in article 15, the International Olive Council may be
provided with the funds for administrative purposes for which provision is made in its Rules of
Procedure.
Article 17
Payment of contributions
1. Each year, at its annual session, the Council of Members shall determine the amount of
the contribution to be paid by each Member for the following calendar year, which shall be
calculated on the basis of the number of participation shares corresponding to each Member as
established pursuant to article 8.
2. The initial conditions of any Member which becomes a Party to this Agreement after its
entry into force shall be assessed by the Council of Members. The contribution of the new Member
shall be calculated on the basis of the share allotted to that Member and of the unexpired portion of
the year in question at the time of the accession of the new Member, but the assessments made upon
the other Members for that calendar year shall not be altered.
3. The contributions provided for in article 15 shall fall due upon the first day of the calendar
year for which they are assessed. They shall be determined in Euros and be payable in that currency
or in the equivalent amount of another freely convertible currency.
2 3
4. The Council of Members shall, at the start of the calendar year, request the Members to
settle their contribution as soon as possible to enable the International Olive Council to operate
normally and to enable the implementation of the activities planned by it for the calendar year
concerned.
If a Member does not settle its contribution within six months of the start of the calendar
year, the Council of Members shall invite it to make payment within the following three months.
If these two deadlines are not met, the matter shall be brought to the attention of the Council of
Members at its regular session. The right of the Member in arrears to participate in decisions of
the Council of Members and to hold elective office in the Council of Members and its
committees and subcommittees shall be suspended automatically until the contribution is paid in
full. The Council of Members shall, after hearing the Member in arrears, take any other
appropriate decisions, which shall be applied.
5. No decision of the Council of Members may relieve a Member of its financial obligations
under this Agreement.
Article 18
Financial control
1. The financial control of the International Olive Council shall be carried out by the
Financial Committee in accordance with article 11.
2. The financial statements of the International Olive Council for the previous calendar year,
certified by an independent auditor, shall be presented to the Financial Committee which, after
analyzing the accounts, shall submit them to the Council of Members at its annual session for
approval and publication.
The Council of Members shall designate the independent auditor by holding a tender in
which at least three relevant specialized firms shall take part.
The independent auditor may not be designated for more than three years.
No firm chosen to audit the accounts of the International Olive Council may be reselected
to act as auditor in the course of the following nine years, during the life of this
Agreement.
3. Furthermore, the Council of Members shall, at its annual session, examine and adopt the
report relating to:
. the verification of the management of the funds, assets and cash of the International
Olive Council;
. the regularity of financial operations and their conformity with the rules and regulations
and budgetary provisions in force.
2 4
Article 19
Liquidation
1. The Council of Members shall, if dissolved, first take the steps stipulated in article 47,
paragraph 5.
2. On the expiry of this Agreement, and unless it is prolonged, extended or renewed, the assets
of the International Olive Council and any uncommitted sums proceeding from the funds referred to
in article 16 as well as any uncommitted sums of the budgets referred to in article 15 shall be repaid
to Members in proportion to the total of their participation shares in force at the time. The voluntary
contributions referred to in article 15 (4) (b) and 15 (5) (b) and the donations referred to in article 15
(5) (c) shall be repaid to the Member or donor concerned.
PART THREE. ECONOMIC AND STANDARDIZATION PROVISIONS
CHAPTER V – DESIGNATIONS AND DEFINITIONS OF OLIVE OILS, OLIVEPOMACE
OILS AND TABLE OLIVES. GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS
Article 20
Use of the designation  "olive oil "
1. The designation  "olive oil " shall be restricted to oil obtained solely from the olive, to the
exclusion of oil obtained by solvent or re-esterification processes and of any mixture with oils of
other kinds.
2. In no case shall the designation  "olive oil " be used alone to refer to olive-pomace oils.
3. The Members undertake to suppress in their internal and international trade any use of the
designation  "olive oil ", alone or in combination with other words, which is not in conformity with
this article.
Article 21
Designations and definitions of olive oils, olive-pomace oils
and table olives
1. The definitions of the following different categories of olive oils and olive-pomace oils are
described in Annex B:
I. Olive oil:
(A) Virgin olive oils:
(a) Virgin olive oils fit for consumption as they are:
(i) Extra virgin olive oil;
2 5
(ii) Virgin olive oil;
(iii) Ordinary virgin olive oil.
(b) Virgin olive oils not fit for consumption as they are:
Lampante virgin olive oil.
(B) Refined olive oil.
(C) Olive oil.
II. Olive-pomace oil:
(A) Crude olive-pomace oil;
(B) Refined olive-pomace oil;
(C) Olive-pomace oil.
2. The definitions of the following types of table olives are described in Annex C:
(i) Green olives;
(ii) Olives turning colour;
(iii) Black olives.
3. The Council of Members may make all such amendments as it deems necessary or
appropriate to the categories of oils and types of table olives provided for in this article and to the
definitions laid down in Annexes B and C.
Article 22
Undertakings by Members
1. The Members of the International Olive Council undertake to apply the designations
prescribed in Annexes B and C in their international trade and shall encourage their application
in their internal trade.
2. The Council of Members shall determine quality criteria standards applicable to the
international trade of the Members, in accordance with article 25, paragraph 3.
3. The Members undertake to analyze in detail the definition of the designations and
geographical indications that may be of economic interest to the Members as well as the
minimum national legal provisions required to ensure, or ensuring, the protection of such
indications. To this end, the International Olive Council shall secure the means to develop a
scheme of mutual recognition of such indications.
4. Geographical indications, when given, may only be applied to virgin olive oils and to table
olives belonging to the Extra trade category which are produced in accordance with the relevant
2 6
provisions for these products.
5. Geographical indications may only be used in conformity with the conditions prescribed by
the law of the country of origin.
6. The Members undertake, in particular, to develop a scheme for the mutual recognition of
geographical indications to ensure protection, ex officio, of geographical indications protected under
the national law of the Members, and to prohibit and repress the use in their territories, for the
purposes of international trade, of such geographical indications and designations of olive oils, olivepomace
oils and table olives as conflict with these principles.
This undertaking shall apply to all inscriptions placed on packagings, invoices, consignment
notes and commercial documents or used in advertising, and to trade marks, registered names and
illustrations connected with the international marketing of olive oils, olive-pomace oils and table
olives, in so far as such inscriptions might constitute false statements or give rise to confusion as to
the origin, source or quality of the olive oils, olive-pomace oils or table olives concerned.
Article 23
Disputes and conciliation
1. Any dispute regarding geographical indications arising from the interpretation of the
provisions of this chapter or from difficulties in their application shall, if the dispute has not been
settled by direct negotiation, be examined by the Council of Members.
2. The Council of Members shall endeavour to reconcile the dispute, after seeking the
opinion of an advisory panel as provided for in article 37, paragraph 1, and after consultation
with the World Intellectual Property Organization, with a competent professional organization
and, if necessary, with the International Chamber of Commerce and specialized international
institutions for analytical chemistry; if this is unsuccessful, and after the Council of Members has
determined that every means has been employed to reach agreement, the Members concerned
shall have the right of recourse in the final instance to the International Court of Justice.
2 7
CHAPTER VI - STANDARDIZATION OF THE MARKETS FOR OLIVE PRODUCTS
Article 24
Examination of the situation of and developments in the market for olive oil,
olive-pomace oil and table olives
1. Within the framework of the general objectives set forth in article 1, and with a view to
contributing towards the standardization of the market for olive oil, olive-pomace oil and table olives
and correcting any imbalance between international supply and demand due to irregularity of
harvests or to other factors, Members shall make available and furnish to the International Olive
Council all the necessary data, statistics and documentation on olive oil, olive-pomace oil and table
olives.
2. The Council of Members shall, at its annual session, make a detailed examination of the
balances for olive products and an overall estimate of the supplies of and demand for olive oil, olivepomace
oil and table olives, on the basis of the information furnished by each Member under article
36, of any information communicated to the International Olive Council by Governments of States
not Parties to this Agreement, and of any other relevant statistical material available to the
International Olive Council on the subject. The Council of the Members shall, taking into account all
the information available to it, examine the market situation and make an overall estimate of supplies
of and demand for all olive products, and may propose to the Members such measures as it considers
desirable.
Article 25
Standardization of the market for olive products
1. The International Olive Council shall undertake studies with a view to making
recommendations to the Members for achieving a balance between production and consumption,
and, more generally, for standardizing the market for olive products over the long term through the
application of appropriate measures.
2. With a view to such standardization, the International Olive Council shall also undertake
studies to recommend to Members suitable solutions to the problems which may arise as regards the
evolution of the international market for olive oil, olive-pomace oil and table olives, through
appropriate arrangements, account being taken of market imbalances resulting from fluctuations in
production or from other causes.
3. The International Olive Council shall examine ways and means of ensuring the expansion of
international trade and the increase of the consumption of olive oil and table olives. In particular, it
shall make appropriate recommendations to the Members concerning:
(a) the adoption and use of a standard international contract for transactions in olive oils,
olive-pomace oils and table olives;
2 8
(b) the constitution and functioning of an international conciliation and arbitration office
to deal with any disputes relating to transactions in olive oils, olive-pomace oils and
table olives;
(c) the application of standards for the physical, chemical and organoleptic
characteristics of olive oils, olive-pomace oils and table olives;
(d) the establishment of uniform methods of analysis.
4. The International Olive Council shall take any measures it considers useful for the
suppression of unfair competition at the international level, including such competition by States
which are not Parties to this Agreement or by persons who are nationals of such States.
PART FOUR. TECHNICAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER VII – TECHNICAL COOPERATION IN THE OLIVE SECTOR
Article 26
Programmes and activities
1. In order to achieve the general objectives set forth in article 1 concerning technical
cooperation with regard to olives and olive products, the International Olive Council, acting through
its Council of Members, shall conceive, promote and elaborate programmes of activities relating
thereto.
2. Such technical cooperation shall encompass olive cultivation, olive oil extraction and table
olive industry.
3. The International Olive Council may take direct action to promote such technical
cooperation.
4. The International Olive Council may decide to call upon the collaboration of public or
private bodies and/or entities, whether national or international, to implement part or all of the
provisions of this chapter. It may also give a financial contribution to the aforementioned bodies
and/or concerns within the budgetary limits.
Article 27
Research and development
1. The International Olive Council, acting through its Council of Members, shall examine any
proposals for research-and-development projects of general interest to Members and shall take such
measures as are appropriate in this field.
2 9
2. The International Olive Council may call upon the collaboration of specialized research
institutes, laboratories and centres for the implementation, monitoring, use and dissemination, for the
benefit of Members, of the findings of the research-and-development programmes.
3. The International Olive Council shall undertake the necessary studies on the economic
returns which can be expected from the application of the results of the research-and-development
programmes.
Article 28
Training and specific operations
1. The International Olive Council, acting through its Council of Members, shall take the
necessary steps for the organization of refresher and training courses at various levels for technical
experts in the olive sector, particularly those from Members that are developing countries.
2. The International Olive Council shall encourage the transfer of technologies to Members that
are developing countries from Members highly advanced in olive cultivation, olive oil extraction and
table olive processing techniques.
3. The International Olive Council shall facilitate any technical cooperation enabling
consultants and experts to be placed at the disposal of the Members requiring such services.
4. The International Olive Council shall facilitate the participation of the delegations and
experts of the Members in its general or scientific–technical meetings.
5. In particular, the Council of Members shall:
(a) carry out specific studies and operations;
(b) convene or foster the holding of international seminars and meetings;
(c) collect technical information and circulate it to all the Members;
(d) promote the coordination of activities relating to technical cooperation among
Members in olive cultivation, olive oil extraction and table olive industry, including
action within the framework of interregional or regional planning;
(e) promote such bilateral or multilateral cooperation as may assist the International
Olive Council in achieving the objectives of this Agreement.
3 0
CHAPTER VIII – OTHER MEASURES
Article 29
Other measures
The International Olive Council shall:
(a) foster and coordinate appropriate studies and research on the biological value of
olive oil and table olives, with particular reference to their nutritional qualities and
other intrinsic properties;
(b) draw up, in association with specialist bodies, olive-related terminology, standards
covering olive products and related methods of analysis, as well as any other
standards connected with the olive sector;
(c) take whatever measures are appropriate to draw up a compendium of established fair
trade practices for international trade in olive oil, olive-pomace oil and table olives.
PART FIVE. PROMOTIONAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER IX – WORLD PROMOTION OF THE CONSUMPTION OF OLIVE OIL
AND TABLE OLIVES
Article 30
Programmes to promote the consumption of olive oil and table olives
1. The Members undertake jointly to conduct generic promotional activities to expand world
consumption of olive oil and table olives, on the basis of the use of the designations of edible
olive oils and table olives defined in Annexes B and C respectively.
2. Those activities shall take the form of educational and information campaigns and shall deal
with the organoleptic and chemical characteristics of olive oils and table olives, as well as with their
nutritional, therapeutic and other properties.
3. The promotional campaigns shall aim to inform consumers about the designations, origins
and sources of olive oils and table olives, care being taken to ensure that no quality, origin or source
is either promoted or given prominence in preference to another.
4. The promotional programmes to be undertaken under this article shall be decided by the
Council of Members in the light of the resources made available to it. Priority shall be given to
action in the mainly consuming countries and in those countries in which the consumption of olive
oil and table olives is likely to increase.
5. The resources of the promotion budget shall be used in the light of the following criteria:
3 1
(a) the volume of consumption and the possibilities of developing existing markets;
(b) the creation of new outlets for olive oil and table olives;
(c) the return obtainable on the promotion expenditure.
6. The Council of Members shall administer all the resources allocated for joint promotion
purposes. It shall prepare an annual estimate of receipts and expenditure relating to this promotion
as an annex to its budget.
7. In the event of a Member, organization or person providing a voluntary contribution for the
conduct of promotional action, the Council of Members shall adopt the procedures governing the use
of such resources within the framework of a specific agreement between the International Olive
Council and the contributor.
8. The International Olive Council shall be responsible for the technical execution of the
promotional programmes, which it may also entrust to specialized bodies chosen in accordance with
the Rules of Procedure.
Article 31
International guarantee label of the International Olive Council
The Council of Members may make provision for the application of the international
quality guarantee label ensuring compliance with the international standards of the International
Olive Council.
PART SIX. OTHER PROVISIONS
CHAPTER X – MISCELLANEOUS OBLIGATIONS
Article 32
General obligations
The Members undertake not to adopt any measures that conflict with their obligations under
this Agreement or with the general objectives set forth in article 1.
3 2
Article 33
Financial liability of Members
In accordance with the general principles of law, the financial liability of each Member to the
International Olive Council and to other Members is limited to the extent of its obligations under
article 15 concerning the contributions to the budgets referred to in the same article, and, as the case
may be, under article 16 referring to the administrative funds.
Article 34
Environmental and ecological aspects
Members shall give due consideration to environmental and ecological aspects at all
stages of olive and olive oil production and undertake to implement such action as may be
deemed necessary by the Council of Members to improve or solve any problems encountered in
this sphere.
Article 35
Encouragement of international trade and consumption
The Members undertake to adopt all the appropriate measures to facilitate trade, encourage
consumption of olive oils and table olives and ensure the proper development of the international
trade in these products. To that end, they undertake to conform to the principles, rules and
guidelines they have approved in the competent international fora.
Article 36
Information
The Members undertake to make available and furnish to the International Olive Council all
the statistics, data and documentation which it needs to discharge its functions under this Agreement,
and in particular any information it requires in order to establish the balances for olive oils, olivepomace
oils and table olives and to acquire a knowledge of Members' national policies for olive
products.
3 3
CHAPTER XI – DISPUTES AND COMPLAINTS
Article 37
Disputes and complaints
1. Any dispute which concerns the interpretation or application of this Agreement other than
a dispute under article 23, and which is not settled by negotiation shall, at the request of any
Member which is a party to the dispute, be referred to the Council of Members, which shall take
a decision in the absence of the Member concerned after seeking an opinion, where appropriate,
from an advisory panel, the composition and operational details of which shall be laid down in
the Rules of Procedure.
2. A substantiated opinion by the advisory panel shall be submitted to the Council of Members,
which shall in all circumstances settle the dispute after considering all the relevant facts.
3. Any complaint that a Member has failed to fulfil its obligations under this Agreement
shall, at the request of the Member making the complaint, be referred to the Council of Members,
which shall take a decision in the absence of the Member in question after consulting the
Members concerned and after seeking an opinion, where appropriate, from the advisory panel
referred to in paragraph 1 of this article.
4. If the Council of Members finds that a Member has committed a breach of this Agreement, it
may either impose on that Member sanctions, ranging from a simple warning to the suspension of
the Member's right to participate in decisions of the Council of Members until it has met its
obligations, or, in accordance with the procedure laid down in article 45, exclude the Member from
participation in the Agreement. The Member in question shall have the right of recourse in the final
instance to the International Court of Justice.
CHAPTER XII – FINAL PROVISIONS
Article 38
Depositary
The Government of Spain is hereby designated as the depositary of this Agreement.
Article 39
Signature, ratification, acceptance and approval
1. This Agreement shall be open for signature at Madrid with the Government of Spain from 15
June to 31 December 2005 inclusive by Governments invited to the United Nations Conference for
the Negotiation of a Successor Agreement to the International Agreement on Olive Oil and Table
Olives, 1986, as Amended and Extended, 1993.
2. Any Government referred to in paragraph 1 of this article may:
3 4
(a) At the time of signing this Agreement, declare that by such signature it expresses its
consent to be bound by this Agreement (definitive signature); or
(b) After signing this Agreement, ratify, accept or approve it by the deposit of an
instrument to that effect with the depositary.
This Agreement shall be open for signature, ratification, acceptance or approval by the
European Community.
3. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the depositary.
Article 40
Accession
1. Any State may accede to this Agreement upon conditions established by the International
Olive Council, acting through its Council of Members, which shall include a number of participation
shares and a time limit for the deposit of the instruments of accession. The Council of Members
may, however, grant extensions of time to Governments which are unable to accede by the time limit
set in the conditions of accession. Upon accession, a State shall be deemed to be listed in Annex A to
this Agreement, together with its participation shares as laid down in the conditions of accession.
This Agreement shall be open for accession by the European Community.
2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the depositary.
Instruments of accession shall state that the Government accepts all the conditions established by the
International Olive Council.
Article 41
Notification of provisional application
1. A signatory Government which intends to ratify, accept or approve this Agreement, or a
Government for which the Council of Members has established conditions for accession but which
has not yet been able to deposit its instrument, may, at any time, notify the depositary that it will
apply this Agreement provisionally when it enters into force in accordance with article 42, or, if it is
already in force, at a specified date.
2. A Government which has notified under paragraph 1 of this article that it will apply this
Agreement when it enters into force, or, if it is already in force, at a specified date shall, from that
time, be a provisional Member until it deposits its instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or
accession and thus becomes a Member.
Article 42
Entry into force
3 5
1. This Agreement shall enter into force definitively on the day when at least five
Governments among those mentioned in Annex A to this Agreement and accounting for at least
90 per cent of the participation shares have signed this Agreement definitively or have ratified,
accepted or approved it, or acceded thereto.
2. If, on 1 January 2006, this Agreement has not entered into force in accordance with
paragraph 1 of this article, it shall enter into force provisionally if by that date five Governments
satisfying the percentage requirements of paragraph 1 of this article have signed this Agreement
definitively or have ratified, accepted or approved it, or have notified the depositary that they will
apply this Agreement provisionally.
3. If, on 1 January 2006, the requirements for entry into force under paragraph 1 or paragraph 2
of this article have not been met, the depositary shall invite those Governments which have signed
this Agreement definitively or have ratified, accepted or approved it, or have notified that they will
apply this Agreement provisionally, to decide whether to bring this Agreement into force definitively
or provisionally among themselves, in whole or in part, on such date as they may determine.
4. For any Government which has not notified the depository under article 41 that it will apply
this Agreement provisionally and which deposits an instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval
or accession after the entry into force of this Agreement, this Agreement shall enter into force on the
date of such deposit.
Article 43
Amendment
1. The International Olive Council, acting through its Council of Members, may recommend
amendments of this Agreement to the Members.
2. The proposed amendment shall be adopted by the Council of Members, in accordance with
article 9 of the Agreement, and shall enter into force for all Members 90 days after the depositary has
received notification of the decision of the Council of Members.
Article 44
Withdrawal
1. Any Member may withdraw from this Agreement at any time after the entry into force of this
Agreement by giving written notice of withdrawal to the depositary. The Member shall
simultaneously inform the International Olive Council in writing of the action it has taken.
2. Withdrawal under this article shall become effective 90 days after the notice is received by
the depositary.
Article 45
3 6
Exclusion
Without prejudice to article 37, if the Council of Members decides that any Member is in
breach of its obligations under this Agreement and decides further that such breach significantly
impairs the operation of this Agreement, it may, by reasoned decision of the other Members taken in
the absence of the Member concerned, exclude that Member from this Agreement. The International
Olive Council shall immediately notify the depositary of its decision. The Member in question shall
cease to be a Party to this Agreement 30 days after the date of the decision of the Council of
Members.
Article 46
Settlement of accounts
1. The Council of Members shall determine any settlement of accounts which it finds equitable,
taking into account all the commitments entailing legal consequences for the International Olive
Council and which would have repercussions on the contributions of a Member which has
withdrawn from this Agreement or which has been excluded from the International Olive Council or
has otherwise ceased to be a Party to this Agreement, as well as the time needed to ensure an
adequate transition, in particular when such commitments have to be terminated.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the sub-paragraph above, such Member shall be bound to
pay any amounts due from it to the International Olive Council in respect of the period during which
it was a Member.
2. Upon termination of this Agreement, no Member referred to in paragraph 1 of this article
shall be entitled to any share of the proceeds of the liquidation or the other assets of the International
Olive Council; nor shall it be burdened with any part of the deficit, if any, of the International Olive
Council.
Article 47
Duration, prolongation, extension and termination
1. This Agreement shall remain in force until 31 December 2014 unless the International Olive
Council, acting through its Council of Members, decides to prolong it, extend it, renew it or
terminate it in advance in accordance with the provisions of this article.
2. The International Olive Council, acting through its Council of Members, may decide to
prolong this Agreement for not more than two periods of two years each. Any Member which does
not accept any such prolongation of this Agreement shall so inform the International Olive Council
and shall cease to be a Party to this Agreement from the beginning of the period of prolongation.
3 7
3. If, before 31 December 2014, or before the expiry of a period of prolongation referred to in
paragraph 2 of this article, as the case may be, a new agreement or a protocol for the extension of
this Agreement has been negotiated but has not yet entered into force either definitively or
provisionally, this Agreement shall remain in force beyond its expiry date until the new agreement or
protocol enters into force, provided that the period of such prolongation does not exceed 12 months.
4. The International Olive Council, acting through its Council of Members, may at any time
decide to terminate this Agreement with effect from such date as it may determine.
5. Notwithstanding the expiry or termination of this Agreement, the International Olive Council
shall continue in being for as long as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the liquidation
of the International Olive Council, including the settlement of accounts, and shall have during that
period such powers and functions as may be necessary for these purposes.
6. The International Olive Council shall notify the depositary of any decision taken under this
article.
Article 48
Reservations
No reservations may be made with respect to any of the provisions of this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto, have affixed their
signature under this Agreement on the dates indicated.
DONE at Geneva on 29 April 2005, the texts of this Agreement in the Arabic, English,
French, Italian and Spanish languages being equally authentic.
3 8
ANNEX A
Participation shares in the budgets of the Organization
established in accordance with article 8*
Algeria ……………………………………………………………… 13
European Community ……………………………………………... 783
Croatia……………………………………………………………… 5
Egypt ..……………………………………………………………… 9
Iran (Islamic Republic of) …………………………………………. 5
Israel………………………………………………………………… 5
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ….………………………………………... 5
Jordan ………………………………………………………………. 8
Lebanon …………………………………………………………….. 5
Morocco…………………………………………………………….. 27
Montenegro ………………………………………………………… 5
Syrian Arab Republic ……………………………….……………… 52
Serbia ………………………………….…………………………… 5
Tunisia ………………………………………………………………. 73
_________
Total …………………………..…1,000
* Calculations are based on the average production for the period 1999/2000 - 2004/2005 and
on the average exports for the period 2000-2005.
3 9
ANNEX B
Designations and definitions of olive oils and olive-pomace oils
The designations of the different categories of olive oils and olive-pomace oils are given
below with the definition corresponding to each designation:
I. Olive oil is the oil obtained solely from the fruit of the olive tree, to the exclusion of oils
obtained using solvents or re-esterification processes and of any mixture with oils of other
kinds. It is designated as follows:
A. Virgin olive oils: oils which are obtained from the fruit of the olive tree solely by
mechanical or other physical means under conditions, particularly thermal conditions,
that do not lead to deterioration of the oil, and which have not undergone any treatment
other than washing, decantation, centrifugation and filtration. Virgin olive oils shall be
classified and designated as follows:
(a) Virgin olive oils fit for consumption as they are:
(i) Extra virgin olive oil: virgin olive oil which has a free acidity, expressed as
oleic acid, of not more than 0.8 grams per 100 grams and the other
characteristics of which correspond to those laid down for this category;
(ii) Virgin olive oil: virgin olive oil which has a free acidity, expressed as oleic
acid, of not more than 2.0 grams per 100 grams and the other characteristics
of which correspond to those laid down for this category;
(iii) Ordinary virgin olive oil: virgin olive oil which has a free acidity, expressed
as oleic acid, of not more than 3.3 grams per 100 grams and the other
characteristics of which correspond to those laid down for this category.1/
(b) Virgin olive oil not fit for consumption as it is:
Lampante virgin olive oil: virgin olive oil which has a free acidity, expressed as
oleic acid, of more than 3.3 grams per 100 grams and/or the organoleptic
characteristics and other characteristics of which correspond to those laid down for
this category. It is intended for refining for use for human consumption, or it is
intended for technical use.
1/ This product may only be sold direct to the consumer if permitted in the country of retail
sale. If not permitted, the designation of this product shall comply with the legal provisions
of the country concerned.
4 0
B. Refined olive oil: olive oil obtained by refining virgin olive oils. It has a free acidity,
expressed as oleic acid, of not more than 0.3 grams per 100 grams, and its other
characteristics correspond to those laid down for this category. 2/
C. Olive oil: oil consisting of a blend of refined olive oil and virgin olive oils fit for
consumption as they are. It has a free acidity, expressed as oleic acid, of not more
than 1 gram per 100 grams, and its other characteristics correspond to those laid
down for this category. 3/
II. Olive-pomace oil is the oil obtained by treating olive pomace with solvents or other physical
treatments, to the exclusion of oils obtained by re-esterification processes and of any mixture
with oils of other kinds. It is classified as follows:
A. Crude olive-pomace oil: olive-pomace oil whose characteristics are those laid down for
this category. It is intended for refining for use for human consumption, or it is
intended for technical use.
B. Refined olive-pomace oil: oil obtained by refining crude olive-pomace oil. It has a free
acidity, expressed as oleic acid, of not more than 0.3 grams per 100 grams and its other
characteristics correspond to those laid down for this category.4/
C. Olive-pomace oil: oil consisting of a blend of refined olive-pomace oil and virgin olive
oils fit for consumption as they are. It has a free acidity, expressed as oleic acid, of not
more than 1 gram per 100 grams and its other characteristics correspond to those laid
down for this category. In no case shall this blend be called  "olive oil ". 5/
