INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT
Between the
US DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT,
US DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE, FOREST SERVICE FOR THE NATIONAL
MULTI-AGENCY COORDINATION GROUP FOR AND ON BEHALF OF THE
GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
And the
SECRETARY OF THE DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT
FOR ITSELF AND AS AGENT OF THE CROWN IN THE RIGHT OF EACH AUSTRALIAN
STATE AND TERRITORY AND THE CROWN IN THE RIGHT OF NEW ZEALAND
This International Agreement (IA) is made and entered into between the US Department of Interior
(USDI), Bureau of Land Management hereinafter referred to as BLM and the US Department of
Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service, hereinafter referred to as Forest Service under the authority of
Public Law 101-11, Temporary Emergency Wildfire Suppression Act, approved April 7, 1989, and 42
USC 1856p.
And the
The Secretary of the Department of Natural Resources and Environment (NRE) on behalf of the Fire
Control Officers Group (FCOG) and associated agencies as detailed in Schedules 1 & 2.
I. PURPOSE:
The purpose of the agreement is to facilitate mutual assistance in wild land fire fighting between
Australia, New Zealand and the United States of America.
II. AUTHORITY:
The Public Law 1-101, Temporary Emergency Wildfire Suppression Act and 42 USC 1856p provide
authority to enter into an agreement with any foreign country for wildfire suppression support.
III GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Requests for assistance will be channelled by the most expeditious means to the appropriate authorized
official in accordance with the following:
1. Requests for assistance from the USA will be made from the relevant Australian and New
Zealand agencies via NRE to the National interagency Coordination Center (NICC) at the
National Interagency Fire Center (NIFC) in Boise, Idaho. The authorized officials are the
BLM Director or the US Forest Service Director at NIFC.
2. Requests for assistance from participating Australian and New Zealand agencies will be made
from NIFC to Chief fire Officer or NRE.
3. NRE and NIFC will be responsible for providing the US and Australian and New Zealand
officials with the names of the authorized Australian and New Zealand officials within
fourteen days of request for assistance.
IV. PERSONNEL
1. Reimbursement for personnel will be on the following basis:
a. All salaries, overtime and hazard pay submitted for payment by the sending agency
will be reimbursed by the receiving agency, in accordance with salary schedules
and/or union contracts in existence with the lending agency or as rates agreed in
advance of engagement.
b. The costs of travel, and daily personnel care costs shall in all cases be reimbursed by
the receiving agency. Where daily rates are not in effect receipts are required for all
expenses.
c. All medical and associated compensation costs incurred in the course of the
deployment to the requesting agency.
2. The parties to this Agreement may request overhead personnel with specialized expertise for
fire assignments.
3. Personnel assigned as part of a resource order will receive an adequate orientation and health
and safety session prior to deployment and should be debriefed prior to demobilization.
4. Each agency assigning personnel to a resource order will certify that the personnel assigned
will meet the requirements of the position ordered.
5. The lending agency will attempt to provide all the safety equipment required to meet their
regulations. Should additional equipment be required by the receiving agency, the receiving
agency will supply at their expense.
6. When appropriate the lending agency and receiving agency will provide for adequate
liaison. The liaison from the receiving agency will be responsible for the health, safety,
welfare and commissary needs of all personnel engaged.
7. The requesting agency will insure that immediate medical services are afforded to any
member of the incoming forces regardless of the nature of the requirement or the type of
medical aid required. Costs for medical services will be covered by the requesting agency
until the employee is returned to the fire line of sending agency, other than costs for ongoing
rehabilitation which shall continue to be met by the requesting agency.
8. Death or long-term compensation claims will go through sending agencies workers
compensation program and billed for reimbursement to the receiving agency.
9. All personnel should carry with them two examples of identification and my conviction may
prohibit mobilization to the receiving country.
10. If an individual is deemed inadmissible due to minor criminal/felony offences, the individual
will be required to undergo an interview process with Immigration. All costs associated with
the process will be born by the individual or the receiving agency.
V. EQUIPMENT AND SUPPLIES
1. Expendable equipment and supplies shall be considered purchases on delivery, and full
replacement costs will be reimbursed by the receiving agency. Items should be considered
expendable if they are not reusable or cannot be recycled.
2. Non-expendable and accountable equipment and supplies will be credited to the receiving
agency upon return to the lending agency. The costs of refurbishing is reimbursable by the
receiving agency unless the sending agency agrees that the receiving agency will perform the
work.
3. In the event that any equipment or supplies are damaged beyond repair or not returned, they
will either be replaced by the receiving agency with new equipment or supplies of the same
quantity and to the lending agency's standards, or full replacement cost will be reimburse by
the receiving agency.
4. Some specialized equipment may be accompanied by trained technicians and/or operators to
ensure safe and efficient set up and operation of equipment.
5. It is recommended that all equipment be registered with the respective lending agencies
customs authority prior to mobilization.
6. All transportation costs will reimbursed by the receiving agency.
VI. AIRCRAFT (This section applies to contract and government owned aircraft.
1. Reimbursement will be made on the following basis:
a) All direct flight costs will be reimbursed by the receiving agency.
b) Minimum contract guarantees will be reimbursed by the receiving
agency when the resource order is for aircraft services. Contract guarantees
will not be assessed if the aircraft is used solely to transport personnel between
countries.
c) Unless otherwise agreed upon between parties to this Agreement, maintenance
and/or damage to the aircraft is the responsibility of the contractor and/or owner,
and is not reimbursable. Damage to an aircraft caused as a direct result of agency
personnel actions are the receiving agency's responsibility and are reimbursable.
2. All contract aircraft mobilized to the USA will be reimbursed by the USA.
3. All aircraft will meet the receiving agency's specifications for standards and pilot
qualifications and will be inspected prior to being put into service.
VII. INDEMNITY
1. The Government of the United Stated of America hereby indemnifies and undertakes
to keep indemnified the Secretary to the Department of Natural Resources and
Environment of the State of Victoria Australia and the State of Victoria and their
officers, employees, servants and agents from and or against all actions, claims,
demands, costs and expenses of whatever nature (including the costs of defending or
settling any action, claim or demand) and howsoever missing either directly or
indirectly from or in consequence of any act or omission of any Department of
Natural Resources and Environment an or State of Victoria officer, employee, servant
or agent as defined in Schedule 1 and Schedule 2 attending the United States to assist
any entity or person within the United States either directly or indirectly in response to
a request made by the United States National Interagency Multi Agency Coordination
Group or any similar request made for and on behalf of the United States. Such
indemnity will be extended to all agencies listed in schedules 1 & 2 of this agreement
and to their associated governments officers, employees, servants and agents.
2. The receiving agency agrees to reimburse to a sending agency all extra workers'
compensation insurance costs incurred by the sending agency as a result of worker's
compensation claim being made in respect of any injury occurring during the term of
this agreement.
VIII RECALL
The recall resources from the receiving agency shall be communicated through NICC and the
NRE Emergency Coordination Centre and the lending agency will attempt to give 24 hours notice.
IX BILLING AND PAYMENT
1. The billing and payment should be submitted directly to the receiving agency for
processing.
2. Invoices for goods and services, provided by Australia, New Zealand to the United States
will be paid for in US dollars and invoices for goods and services, provided by the United
States to Australia/New Zealand, will be paid for in US dollars.
3. All interest charges will be forgiven for over-due accounts on Government to Government
invoices provided payment is made prior to the following 30 June.
4. Billing will include the following:
a. cover letter with reference to specific resource number(s).
b. an original itemized invoice.
c. backup documentation (summarized listing of salary, supplies, travel and
equipment with dates, hours, and crew/
equipment/aircraft type).
5. United States billing will be to the following address:
National Interagency fire Center
3833 South Development Ave.
Boise, ID 83705-5354
6. New Zealand and Australia billing will be NRE.
X. AUTHORIZATION
The principal contacts for this LA are:
Forest Service BLM
USDA, Forest Service USDI, BLM
3833 SO. Development Ave. 3833 So. Development Ave.
Boise, ID 83705 Boise, ID 83705
Australia/New Zealand
Fires Management
Department of Natural Resources & Environment
PO Box 41
EAST MELBOURNE 3002
VICTORIA
AUSTRALIA
Forest Service
FS Accounting Station - Washington Office, NIFC, 1302
Job Code - Various
FS Agreement No. - 00-11130200-0148
FS Agency Location Code - 12-40-1100
Budget Object Code - N/A
Performing Agency Location Code - N/A
FS Reference Document No. (MO) - 1302 13020000-01-48
Send bill to: USDA, Forest Service
Attn: Tory Majors
3833 So. Development Ave.
Boise, Idaho 83705
Bureau of land Management
Fund Code - N/A
BLM Agreement No. - 1422RAA100-001
BLM Agency Location Code - 14-11-0008
Performing Agency Location Code - (Insert ALC)
Send bill to: USDI, Bureau of Land Management
Attn: Rich Harter
3833 So. Development Ave.
Boise, Idaho 83705
1. A detailed list of charges incurred will be made available upon request. Any excess
funds not used for the agreed costs shall be refunded to the Forest Service and/or BLM or
NRE (as the case may be upon expiration of this International Agreement.
2. Modifications within the scope of this International Agreement shall be made by mutual
consent of all parties, by the issuance of a written modifications, signed and dated by all
parties, prior to any changes being performed. The Forest Service, BLM and NRE are not
obligated to fund any changes not properly approved in advance.
3. Any one of the parties, in writing, may terminate their portion of this instrument in
whole, or in part, at any time. Full credit shall be allowed for each party's expenses and all
non-cancellable obligations properly incurred up to the effective date of termination.
4. This International Agreement is executed as of the date of the last signature and, unless
terminated sooner, is effective through five years from that date at which time it will be
reviewed.
SCHEDULE 1
Fire Control Officers Group
Nation State of Territory Agency Member
Australia Victoria Department of Natural
Resources & Environment
Australia New South Wales State forests of New South
Wales
Paul De Mar
Australia Australian Capital
Territory
ACT Forest Tony Bartlet
Australia Western Australia Department of Conservation
and Land Management
Rick Sneeuwjagt
Australia Tasmania Forestry Tasmania Dick Chuter
Australia Tasmania Parks and Wildlife Service
Tasmania
Tony Blanks
Australia Queensland Department of Primary Industry Mike Thomas
Australia Northern Territory Bush Fire Council of the
Northern Territory
Tirn McGuffog
New Zealand New Zealand Fire Service
Commission
Murray Dudfield
New Zealand Department of conservation.
New Zealand
Kerry Hilliard
SCHEDULE 2
Associated Agencies
Nation State of Territory Agency
Australia Victoria Parks Victoria
Australia Victoria Country Fire Authority
Australia Queensland National parks and Wildlife Service, Department of
environment and Heritage
Australia New South Wales NSW Rural Fire Service
Australia Tasmania Tasmania Fire Service
Australia South Australia SA Department of Environment and Heritage
