MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON THE CONSERVATION OF MIGRATORY BIRDS OF PREY
IN AFRICA AND EURASIA
The Signatories
Recalling that the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals,
signed at Bonn on 23 June 1979, calls for international co-operative action to conserve
migratory species and that Article IV.4 of that convention encourages Signatories to conclude
agreements - including non-legally binding administrative agreements in respect of any
populations of migratory species;
Noting that several species of Falconiformes are listed in Appendix I and all of these species
in Appendix II of that Convention;
Considering that migratory birds of prey serve as high-level indicators of ecosystem health
and climate change across their range;
Recognizing that many populations of birds of prey migrate between and within Africa and
Eurasia, crossing the territory of different countries;
Concerned by the considerable number of African-Eurasian migratory species of birds of prey
that presently have an unfavourable conservation status at a regional and/or global level and
especially by the lack of knowledge of the status and trends of migratory birds of prey in
Africa and Asia;
Aware that among the factors which contribute to the unfavourable conservation status of
many African-Eurasian birds of prey species are the loss, degradation and fragmentation of
habitats, increased mortality and reduced breeding success as a result of unlawful killing
(including especially poisoning), unsustainable taking, human economic activities (damaging
biodiversity) and land-use practices and that climate change is likely to cause further adverse
effects on bird of prey populations;
Mindful that a range of existing multilateral environmental instruments can or do contribute to
the conservation of migratory birds of prey but lack a unifying international plan of action;
Convinced of the need for immediate and concerted international actions to conserve African-
Eurasian migratory species of birds of prey and to maintain and restore them in general to
favourable conservation status;
Underlining the need to increase awareness to conserve migratory birds of prey in the
African-Eurasian region;
Recalling Resolution No. 3 adopted by the VI World Conference on Birds of Prey and Owls
held in Budapest, Hungary, 18-23 May 2003, and UNEP/CMS Recommendation 8.12 on
Improving the Conservation Status of Birds of Prey and Owls in Africa and Eurasia;
2
Realising the importance of involving all Range States in the region as well as relevant intergovernmental,
non-governmental and private sector organisations in cooperative conservation
for migratory birds of prey and their habitats;
Acknowledging that effective implementation and enforcement of such actions will require
cooperation between Range States and international and national non-governmental
organisations in order to encourage research, training and awareness raising to maintain,
restore, manage and monitor birds of prey.
HAVE DECIDED as follows:
Scope and Definitions
1. For the purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding:
a) “Birds of Prey” means migratory populations of Falconiformes and Strigiformes
species occurring in Africa and Eurasia, listed in Annex 1 of this Memorandum of
Understanding;
b) “Africa and Eurasia” means Range States and territories listed in Annex 2 of this
Memorandum of Understanding;
c) “Conservation” means the protection and management, including sustainable use of
birds of prey and their habitats, in accordance with the objectives and principles of this
Memorandum of Understanding;
d) “Convention” means the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of
Wild Animals, signed at Bonn on 23 June 1979;
e) “Signatory” means a Signatory to this Memorandum of Understanding in accordance
with Paragraph 23 below;
f) “Secretariat” means the Secretariat of the Convention; and
g) “Action Plan” means the Action Plan for the Conservation of African-Eurasian
Migratory birds of prey contained in Annex 3.
In addition, the terms defined in Article I, sub-paragraphs 1 (a) to (i), of the Convention shall
have the same meaning, mutatis mutandis, in this Memorandum of Understanding.
2. This Memorandum of Understanding is a legally non-binding agreement under Article
IV, paragraph 4 of the Bonn Convention, as defined by Resolution 2.6 adopted at the Second
meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention. (Geneva, 11-14 October 1988).
3. The interpretation of any term or provision of this Memorandum of Understanding
will be made in accordance with the Convention and/or relevant Resolutions adopted by its
Meeting of the Signatories, unless such a term or provision is defined or interpreted
differently in this Memorandum of Understanding.
4. The three annexes form an integral part of this Memorandum of Understanding.
3
Fundamental Principles
5. The Signatories will aim to take co-ordinated measures to achieve and maintain the
favourable conservation status of birds of prey throughout their range and to reverse their
decline when and where appropriate. To this end, they will endeavour to take, within the
limits of their jurisdiction and having regard to their international obligations, the measures
specified in Paragraphs 7 and 8, together with the specific actions laid down in the Action
Plan.
6. In implementing the measures specified in Paragraph 5 above, Signatories will apply
the precautionary principle.
General Conservation Measures
7. The Signatories will strive to adopt, implement and enforce such legal, regulatory and
administrative measures as may be appropriate to conserve birds of prey and their habitat.
8. To this end, the Signatories will endeavour to:
a) identify important habitats, significant routes and congregatory sites for birds of prey
occurring within their territory and encourage their protection, and/or appropriate
management, assessment, rehabilitation and/or restoration;
b) coordinate their efforts to ensure that a network of suitable habitats is maintained or,
where appropriate, established inter alia where such habitats extend over the territory
of more than one Signatory;
c) investigate problems that are posed or are likely to be posed by human activities or
from other causes and will endeavour to implement remedial and preventative
measures, including inter alia habitat rehabilitation and habitat restoration, and
compensatory measures for loss of habitat;
d) cooperate in emergency situations requiring concerted international action, in
developing appropriate emergency procedures to improve the conservation of bird of
prey populations and in preparing guidelines to assist individual Signatories in
addressing such situations;
e) ensure that any utilisation of birds of prey is based on an assessment using the best
available knowledge of their ecology and is sustainable for the species as well as for
the ecological systems that support them;
f) take appropriate measures for the recovery of bird populations and re-introduction of
birds of prey native to their territory provided that such actions will contribute to their
conservation;
g) take appropriate measures to prevent the introduction into their territory of non-native
birds of prey, including hybrids where this would have an adverse effect on the
conservation of native biodiversity;
4
h) encourage research into the biology and ecology of birds of prey, including the
harmonization of research and monitoring methods and, where appropriate, the
establishment of joint or cooperative research and monitoring programmes;
i) assess training requirements to implement conservation actions and, in cooperation
with others where possible, develop appropriate priority training programmes;
j) develop and maintain programmes to raise awareness and understanding of
conservation issues relating to birds of prey and their habitat as well as of the
objectives and provisions of this Memorandum of Understanding;
k) exchange information and the results from research, monitoring, conservation and
education programmes; and
l) cooperate with a view to assisting each other to implement this Memorandum of
Understanding, particularly in the areas of research and monitoring.
9. With a view to promoting the conservation status of birds of prey, Signatories may
encourage other Range States to sign this Memorandum of Understanding.
Implementation and Reporting
10. Each Signatory will designate a contact point for all matters relating to the
implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding; and communicate the name and
address of that contact point to the Coordinating unit once established. Before the
establishment of the Coordinating Unit such duties will be undertaken by an Interim
Coordinating Unit designated by the Secretariat.
11. An Interim Coordinating Unit will be established, in collaboration with the authorities
of the Environment Agency – Abu Dhabi, immediately after the conclusion of this
Memorandum of Understanding. The Interim Coordinating Unit will operate until the
establishment of a permanent Coordinating Unit under paragraph 16, and carry out similar
functions.
12. Within two years of this Memorandum of Understanding becoming effective,
Signatories will aim to prepare and submit to the Interim Coordinating Unit where appropriate
a national or regional (e.g. EU) strategy or equivalent documents (e.g. Single Species Action
Plans) for category 1 and, where appropriate, category 2 species in Table 1 in the Action Plan.
13. The Meeting of the Signatories will be the decision-making body of this Memorandum
of Understanding. The Meeting will elect a Chairman and consider for adoption the rules of
procedure recommended by the Secretariat. Meetings will be arranged wherever possible to
coincide with other appropriate gatherings where the relevant representatives would be
present. Any agency or body technically qualified in such matters may be represented at
sessions of the Meeting of the Signatories by observers, unless at least one third of the
Signatories present object. Participation will be subject to the rules of procedure adopted by
the Meeting.
14. The first session of the Meeting of the Signatories will be convened as soon as
possible after at least three quarters of those that are Signatories at the time this Memorandum
of Understanding becomes effective have submitted their strategies or equivalent measures or,
funds permitting, three years after the Memorandum of Understanding has become effective.
5
15. At the first session, the Interim Coordinating Unit will present an overview report
compiled on the basis of all information at its disposal pertaining to birds of prey. The first
session will also adopt a format for and schedule of regular progress reports on implementing
the strategies or equivalent measures. At its first session the meeting will adopt a procedure
for amending the Annexes to the Memorandum of Understanding and it will also make such
arrangements as may be necessary for convening subsequent sessions of the Meeting of
Signatories.
16. At its first session, the Meeting of the Signatories in collaboration with the Secretariat
will establish a Coordinating Unit which will assist communication, encourage reporting and
facilitate activities between and among Signatories, other interested States and organisations.
The Coordinating Unit will make available to all of the Signatories all of the strategies and
equivalent documents it receives, prepare an overview of progress in implementation of the
Action Plan six months before the second and subsequent sessions of Signatories, and perform
such other functions as may be assigned by the Meeting of Signatories. The Coordinating Unit
will be based in the office of an appropriate national, regional, or international organisation as
agreed by consensus of the Signatories at their first session, after consideration of all offers
received.
17. The Coordinating Unit will compile the national and international progress reports and
make them available to all Signatories and Range States. In respect of the compilation of the
first national and international progress report, this function will be undertaken by the Interim
Coordinating Unit.
18. Signatories that are also Parties to the Convention will in their national report to the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention make specific reference to activities undertaken
in relation to this Memorandum of Understanding.
19. The Signatories will endeavour to exchange without undue delay the scientific,
technical, legal and other information needed to co-ordinate conservation measures and
cooperate with other Range States, appropriate international organisations, national nongovernmental
organisations and scientists with a view to developing co-operative research and
facilitating the implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding.
20. The Signatories will endeavour to finance from national and other sources the
implementation in their territory of the measures necessary for the conservation of birds of
prey. In addition, they will endeavour to assist each other in the implementation and financing
of key points of the Action Plan, and seek assistance from other sources for the financing and
implementation of their strategies or equivalent measures.
Final Provisions
21. This Memorandum of Understanding is concluded for an indefinite period.
22. This Memorandum of Understanding may be amended at any Meeting of the
Signatories. Any amendment adopted will become effective on the date of its adoption by the
Meeting by consensus. The Secretariat will communicate the text of any amendment so
adopted to all Signatories and to all other Range States.
23. Nothing in this Memorandum of Understanding will prevent any of the Signatories
adopting stricter measures for the conservation of birds of prey on its territory.
6
24. The Signatories will review at each session of the Meeting of Signatories this
Memorandum of Understanding, including the operational, administrative and institutional
arrangements for implementation.
25. Nothing in this Memorandum of Understanding will bind any of the Signatories either
jointly or severally.
26. This Memorandum of Understanding will be open for signature indefinitely at the seat
of the CMS Secretariat to all Range States of Africa-Eurasian birds of prey and to any
regional economic integration organisation.
27. Inter-Governmental and international and national non-governmental organisations
may associate themselves with this Memorandum of Understanding through their signature as
co-operating partners, in particular with the implementation of the Action Plan in accordance
with Article VII, paragraph 9 of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species.
28. This Memorandum of Understanding will become effective on the first day of the
month following the date on which there are at least eight Range State Signatories including at
least two each from Europe, Asia and Africa. Thereafter, it will become effective for any
other Signatory on the first day of the month following the date of signature by that Signatory.
29. Any Signatory may withdraw from this Memorandum of Understanding by written
notification to the Secretariat. The withdrawal will take effect for that Signatory six months
after the date on which the Secretariat has received the notification.
30. The Secretariat will be the Depositary of this Memorandum of Understanding.
31. The working language for all matters relating to this Memorandum of Understanding,
including meetings, documents and correspondence, will be English and French.





Annex 1
LIST OF AFRICAN-EURASIAN MIGRATORY BIRDS OF PREY
FALCONIFORMES
Pandionidae
Pandion haliaetus Osprey
Accipitridae
Aviceda cuculoides African Baza
Aviceda jerdoni Jerdon's Baza
Aviceda leuphotes Black Baza
Pernis apivorus European Honey-buzzard
Pernis ptilorhyncus Oriental Honey-buzzard
Chelictinia riocourii African Swallow-tailed Kite
Milvus lineatus Black-eared Kite
Milvus milvus Red Kite
Milvus migrans Black Kite
Haliaeetus leucoryphus Pallas's Fish-eagle
Haliaeetus albicilla White-tailed Eagle
Haliaeetus pelagicus Steller's Sea-eagle
Neophron percnopterus Egyptian Vulture
Gyps fulvus Griffon Vulture
Aegypius monachus Cinereous Vulture
Circaetus gallicus Short-toed Snake-eagle
Circus aeruginosus Western Marsh-harrier
Circus spilonotus Eastern Marsh-harrier
Circus maurus Black Harrier
Circus cyaneus Northern Harrier
Circus macrourus Pallid Harrier
Circus melanoleucos Pied Harrier
Circus pygargus Montagu's Harrier
Accipiter badius Shikra
Accipiter brevipes Levant Sparrowhawk
Accipiter soloensis Chinese Goshawk
Accipiter gularis Japanese Sparrowhawk
Accipiter virgatus Besra
Accipiter ovampensis Ovampo Sparrowhawk
Accipiter nisus Eurasian Sparrowhawk
Accipiter gentilis Northern Goshawk
Butastur rufipennis Grasshopper Buzzard
Butastur indicus Grey-faced Buzzard
Buteo buteo Common Buzzard
Buteo oreophilus Mountain Buzzard
Buteo rufinus Long-legged Buzzard
Buteo hemilasius Upland Buzzard
Buteo lagopus Rough-legged Buzzard
Buteo auguralis Red-necked Buzzard
Aquila pomarina Lesser Spotted Eagle
Aquila clanga Greater Spotted Eagle
Aquila rapax Tawny Eagle
Aquila nipalensis Steppe Eagle
2
Aquila adalberti Spanish Imperial Eagle
Aquila heliaca Eastern Imperial Eagle
Aquila wahlbergi Wahlberg's Eagle
Aquila chrysaetos Golden Eagle
Hieraaetus pennatus Booted Eagle
Spizaetus nipalensis Mountain Hawk-eagle
Falconidae
Falco naumanni Lesser Kestrel
Falco tinnunculus Common Kestrel
Falco alopex Fox Kestrel
Falco vespertinus Red-footed Falcon
Falco amurensis Amur Falcon
Falco eleonorae Eleonora's Falcon
Falco concolor Sooty Falcon
Falco columbarius Merlin
Falco subbuteo Eurasian Hobby
Falco severus Oriental Hobby
Falco biarmicus Lanner Falcon
Falco cherrug Saker Falcon
Falco rusticolus Gyrfalcon
Falco peregrinus Peregrine Falcon
Falco pelegrinoides Barbary Falcon
STRIGIFORMES
Strigidae
Otus brucei Pallid Scops-owl
Otus scops Common Scops-owl
Otus sunia Oriental Scops-owl
Nyctea scandiaca Snowy Owl
Strix uralensis Ural Owl
Strix nebulosa Great Grey Owl
Surnia ulula Northern Hawk Owl
Aegolius funereus Boreal Owl
Ninox scutulata Brown Hawk-owl
Asio otus Long-eared Owl
Asio flammeus Short-eared Owl
3
Annex 2
Map of the area included within this Memorandum of Understanding
Annex 3
ACTION PLAN
FOR THE CONSERVATION OF MIGRATORY BIRDS OF PREY
IN AFRICA AND EURASIA
1. General Aim
The general aim is to ensure that all populations of African-Eurasian migratory birds of
prey (including owls) are maintained in, or returned to, Favourable Conservation Status
within the meaning of Article 1(c) of the Convention.
2. Objectives
For the effective period of this Action Plan, the following objectives are set:
a) To halt and reverse the population declines1 of globally threatened (Critically
Endangered, Endangered and Vulnerable) and Near Threatened birds of prey and
alleviate threats to them such that they are no longer globally threatened or Near
Threatened;
b) To halt and reverse the population declines of other birds of prey with an
Unfavourable Conservation Status within Africa and Eurasia and alleviate threats
to them in order to return their populations to Favourable Conservation Status;
and
c) To anticipate, reduce and avoid potential and new threats to all bird of prey
species, especially to prevent the populations of any species undergoing long-term
decline.
3. Species Categories
3.1. The bird of prey species included in Annex 1 of this Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) are assigned within the following categories:
Category 1: Globally threatened and Near Threatened species as defined
according to the latest IUCN Red List and listed as such in the BirdLife
International World Bird Database;
Category 2: Species considered to have Unfavourable Conservation Status at a
regional level within the Range States and territories listed in Annex 2 to the
MoU; and
Category 3: all other migratory species.
3.2. The species in Annex 1 of this MoU are assigned to the categories provided for in
paragraph 3.1 as given in Table 1, for the effective period of this Action Plan,
unless Table 1 is amended in accordance with a procedure to be agreed by the
Signatories at the first session of the Meeting of Signatories.
4. Priority Actions
Taking into account the predicted impacts of threats and opportunities for reducing them,
the actions for achieving the objectives given in paragraph 2 are considered to be:
a. Protecting all species from unlawful killing, including poisoning, shooting,
persecution, and unsustainable exploitation;
b. Promoting, as far as possible, high environmental standards, including through
Environmental Impact Assessments, in the planning and construction of structures
to minimise their impact on species, particularly by collision and electrocution,
and seeking to minimise the impact of existing structures where it becomes
evident that they constitute a negative impact for the species concerned;
c. Conserving bird of prey habitats by encouraging an Ecosystem Approach to
sustainable development and sectoral land use practices, as envisaged in the
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) Ecosystem Approach (CBD V/6 and
VII/11);
d. Protecting and/or appropriately managing important sites: especially where
Category 1 species breed, and all migration bottlenecks (known important sites
are listed in Table 3);
e. Taking into account the needs of bird of prey conservation in sectors and related
policies such as agriculture, forestry, fisheries, industries, tourism, energy,
chemicals and pesticides;
f. Raising awareness about birds of prey, their current plight and the threats that
they face, and the measures that need to be taken to conserve them;
g. Assessing and monitoring of populations throughout the Range States to establish
reliable population trends; conducting research to establish the impacts of threats
on them and the measures that are needed to alleviate them; and, sharing
information between Signatories and other Range States;
h. Conducting research on species ecology and migratory behaviour, including
analysing available data in order to describe flyway boundaries and migratory
patterns, and routes, at the level of species’ populations; and
i. Building capacity for conservation actions (in relevant institutions and local
communities) by developing knowledge and monitoring of birds of prey.
5. Implementation Framework
5.1. Activities The principal activities Signatories ought to undertake in order to
implement the general provisions of the MoU and the specific issues addressed in
this Action Plan are set out in Table 2. These activities will be addressed by the
strategies, or equivalent documents, as envisaged by paragraph 12 of the MoU.
The Coordinating Unit as envisaged by paragraph 16 of the MoU will assist
signatories with implementation.
5.2. Priorities The activities in Table 2 are accorded the following orders of priority:
First: an activity needed to prevent global extinction of a species.
Second: an activity needed to prevent or reverse population declines in any
globally threatened or Near Threatened species, or the majority of other species
with an Unfavourable Conservation Status.
Third: an activity needed to restore populations of a globally threatened or Near
Threatened species, or to prevent population declines in any species with an
Unfavourable Conservation Status.
Fourth: an activity needed to restore populations in any species with an
Unfavourable Conservation Status, or to prevent population declines in any
species with a Favourable Conservation Status.
These priorities ought to be taken into account in the preparation of strategies, or
equivalent documents, for birds of prey as envisaged under paragraph 12 of the
MoU.
5.3. Time schedule The activities in Table 2 are accorded the following time
schedules:
Immediate: an activity expected to be completed within two years from the date
that the MoU has become effective for that Signatory;
Short term: an activity expected to be completed within three years from the date
that the MoU has become effective for that Signatory;
Medium: an activity expected to be completed within five years from the date that
the MoU has become effective for that Signatory;
Long term: an activity expected to be completed within seven years from the date
that the MoU has become effective for that Signatory; and
Ongoing: an activity expected to be undertaken throughout the period that the
MoU is effective for that Signatory.
5.4. Responsibilities The organisations expected to lead on the various activities are
indicated in Table 2. Signatories are urged to encourage the full range of
necessary organisations to participate in the implementation of this Action Plan
whether or not they are currently Signatories to the MoU.

5.5. Targets The Coordinating Unit will monitor the progress and efficacy of this
Action Plan according to the performance targets for certain activities given in
Table 2.
6. Synergy with MEAs
Insofar as a Range State or a Regional Economic Integration Organisation (REIO)
Signatory which is represented as a Signatory to this Memorandum of Understanding is
also Contracting Party to one or more Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs)
that has or have provisions that achieve or otherwise assist the aims, objectives and
activities of this Action Plan, such MEAs will be applied as appropriate and to their full
extent in the first instance.
7. Progress Reports
Taking advice from Signatories on their progress in implementing this Action Plan as
envisaged in paragraphs 12 and 14 of the MoU, the Secretariat will report on progress
with implementing the Action Plan in accordance with paragraph 15 of the MoU.
8. Period of Effectiveness
This Action Plan comes into effect on the same date as the MoU for a period of seven
years. At least two years before the expiry of this period, a full review of the Action Plan
will be undertaken and a revised version prepared for the approval of the Signatories.
