EMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON THE CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT OF DUGONGS (Dugong dugon)
AND THEIR HABITATS THROUGHOUT THEIR RANGE
The Signatory States,
Aware that the populations of dugongs are seriously threatened throughout the range of the
species and that effective conservation and management requires an integrated ecosystem
approach;
Recognising that dugongs migrate and disperse over vast distances, which makes their
survival dependent on their conservation and management over a wide area and in a wide
range of marine and coastal habitats;
Acknowledging that human activities that may threaten dugong populations directly or
indirectly include destruction or modification of habitat, coastal development, pollution,
fishing activities, vessel strikes, unsustainable hunting or poaching, uncontrolled mariculture
and tourism;
Concerned about the harm caused to dugongs by the gear used in some forms of fishing, such
as coastal trawling and driftnet fishing, including activities by vessels of Distant-Water
Fishing Nations, while recognizing that some fishing activities are conducted responsibly;
Acknowledging their shared responsibility for the conservation and management of dugong
populations and their habitats highlighting the importance of seagrass beds;
Recognising the desirability of involving other States whose nationals or vessels conduct
activities that may affect dugongs of the region, as well as States that may be in a position to
contribute resources or expertise that may promote the implementation of this Memorandum
of Understanding;
Noting that dugongs have a priority for conservation action through their listing in the
respective appendices of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild
Animals (CMS) and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES);
Noting that CMS calls for international cooperative action to conserve migratory species, and
that CMS Article IV encourages CMS Contracting Parties to conclude Agreements, including
non-legally binding agreements, in respect of any population of migratory species;
Recalling also Resolution 2.6 of the Second Meeting of the CMS Conference of the Parties
which recommended that Parties implement where appropriate CMS Article IV, paragraph 4,
within the spirit of the Convention through the use of instruments such as memoranda of
understanding; and
2
Further noting recommendation 7.5 and resolution 8.5 of the Seventh and Eighth Meetings of
the CMS Conference of the Parties called on Range States of dugongs to cooperate among
themselves, as appropriate, and participate actively to develop and conclude a Memorandum
of Understanding and a Conservation and Management Plan to conserve and manage dugongs
throughout the species’ range;
Express their desire to work closely together to improve the conservation status of dugongs
and the habitats on which they depend. To this end, the Signatory States to this Memorandum
of Understanding, in the spirit of co-operation, have reached the following understandings.
They will:
1. Endeavour to co-operate closely in order to restore, or where appropriate maintain, a
favourable conservation status for dugongs and the habitats on which they depend,
taking into account, where appropriate, subsistence and customary use of dugongs in
those States where it is permitted.
2. Consider joining those international instruments most relevant to the conservation and
management of dugongs and their habitat, in order to enhance the legal protection of
the species in the region.
3. Make every effort to review, formulate, revise and harmonise national legislation or
regulations, as necessary, relevant to the conservation and management of dugongs
and their habitats.
4. Implement, subject to the availability of necessary resources, the Conservation and
Management Plan annexed to this Memorandum of Understanding. The Conservation
and Management Plan will address:
(a) Direct and indirect causes of dugong mortality;
(b) Research and monitoring of dugong populations;
(c) Protection, conservation and management of habitats;
(d) Research into and monitoring of important dugong habitats;
(e) Awareness of dugong conservation;
(f) National, regional and international cooperation;
(g) Implementation of the MoU;
(h) Legal protection of dugong and their habitats; and
(i) Capacity building at all levels.
5. Establish a Secretariat, based in an appropriate organisation or institution, to be
decided by consensus of the Signatory States, to assist in the administration and
implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding by communicating with,
reporting on and facilitating activities between and among Signatory States and
performing such other functions as may be assigned by the Signatory States, such as
convening meetings.
6. Assess the implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding, including the
Conservation and Management Plan, at regular meetings to be attended by
representatives of each of the Signatory States concerned, and persons or organisations
technically qualified in dugong conservation and management.
3
7. Facilitate the timely exchange of relevant information necessary to coordinate
conservation and management measures and to cooperate with relevant organizations
and recognized experts and so as to facilitate the work conducted in relation to the
Conservation and Management Plan.
8. Designate a competent national authority to serve as a focal point for communication
among Signatory States and for implementing activities under this Memorandum of
Understanding, and communicate the complete contact details of this authority (and
any changes thereto) to the Secretariat.
9. Provide to the Secretariat a regular report on their implementation of this
Memorandum of Understanding, the frequency of which will be determined at the first
meeting of the Signatory States. The Secretariat will make available to the Signatory
States the national reports received and will prepare a periodic review of progress
made to implement the Memorandum of Understanding and the Conservation and
Management Plan.
10. Assess at the first meeting of Signatory States, and review periodically, the need for
and possibilities of obtaining financial resources, as well as the establishment of a
special fund for purposes such as:
a) Contributing towards any expenses required to operate the Secretariat and
activities carried out under this Memorandum of Understanding; and
b) Assisting the Signatory States to carry out their responsibilities under this
Memorandum of Understanding.
Basic Principles
11. This Memorandum of Understanding is an agreement under Article IV, paragraph 4,
of CMS and is not legally binding.
12. The Conservation and Management Plan is an integral part of this Memorandum of
Understanding.
13. This Memorandum of Understanding is open for signature by the Range States of the
dugong. It will take effect with two signatures. It will become effective for each
subsequent signatory on the date of signature.
14. This Memorandum of Understanding will remain open for signature indefinitely, and
will remain in effect indefinitely subject to the right of any Signatory State to
terminate its participation by providing one year’s written notice to all other
signatories.
15. The Memorandum of Understanding, including the Conservation and Management
Plan, may be amended by a consensus of the Signatory States.
16. Signatory States acknowledge that they may implement more stringent measures
domestically than those specified in the Conservation and Management Plan.
4
17. Signatory States may establish, by mutual agreement, bilateral, sub-regional or
regional management plans that are consistent with this Memorandum of
Understanding.
18. Actions under this Memorandum of Understanding will be coordinated with Signatory
States, as well as with sub-regional institutions in the Region.
19. The original text of this Memorandum of Understanding, in the Arabic, English,
French and Chinese languages, each language version being equally authentic, shall be
deposited with the CMS Secretariat, which will act as the depositary. The working
language for all matters related to this Memorandum of Understanding will be
English.
Signed at Abu Dhabi on this 31st day of October 2007
