Memorandum of Understanding
concerning
Conservation Measures for the Eastern Atlantic Populations of the
Mediterranean Monk Seal (Monachus monachus)
Among the competent authorities of:
The Islamic Republic of Mauritania
The Kingdom of Morocco
The Republic of Portugal
The Kingdom of Spain
The undersigned, acting on behalf of the respective authorities named above,
Recognising that the Mediterraueau Monk Seal (hereinafter the Monk Seal), Monachus
monachus, is one of the most threatened mammals in the world and that illCN - The World
Conservation Union - has classified the species as critically endangered;
Aware of their international responsibilities to conserve the Atlantic populations of the Monk
Seal pursuant to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) (Nairobi, 1992), which has
recognized migratory species as a unique globally important component of biodiversity under
the Convention on Migratory Species (CMS) (Bonn, 1979), aud that CMS is the CBD lead
partner in conserving aud sustainably using migratory species over their entire migratory
range;
Recalling that the Monk Seal is included in both Appendix I aud Appendix II of CMS, thus
highlighting the need for concerted action aud international cooperation among the Range
States;
Further recalling that CMS calls for international cooperative action to conserve migratory
species, aud that CMS, article N, paragraph 4, encourages CMS Contracting Parties to
conclude Agreements in respect of the population or a part of the population geographically
isolated;
Acknowledging that the Mediterraueau populations of the Monk Seal have been the focus of
attention since 1986 by the Mediterraueau Action Plan of the United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP), and that au Action Plan for the Monk Seal in the Mediterraueau has
been developed within the framework of the Convention for the Protection of the Marine
Environment aud the Coastal Region of the Mediterraueau (hereinafter Barcelona
Convention);
2
Conscious that the Monk Seal remains endangered across West Africa and the Macaronesia
due to the loss of its range and the decline in its numbers, and that actions must be taken
immediately to prevent the disappearance of the remaining populations;
Noting that the Monk Seal plays an important ecological role in coastal and marine
ecosystems, and that genetic studies indicate that the Atlantic populations may form a
separate unit;
Acknowledging that natural phenomena and the development of human activities have
significantly reduced the Monk Seal population, and that this has caused extreme
demographic stress leading the species to find refuge in suboptimal and fragmented habitats;
Understanding that this species performs long movements, which makes the survival of the
individuals dependent upon the conservation of habitats in the coastal and marine area of the
Range States, and also in the high seas;
Conscious that better knowledge of the Monk Seal's biology and movements would assist in
targeting conservation measures;
Recalling that the Atlantic Monk Seal Working Group, with financial and leading support
from the Ministry of Environment of Spain, has developed the Action Plan for the Recovery
of the Mediterranean Monk Seal in the Eastern Atlantic (hereinafter the Action Plan), and
that the Eighth Meeting of the CMS Conference of the Parties (Nairobi, 2005) has endorsed
the Action Plan;
Recognising that some of the Range States have already developed national Monk Seal
conservation strategies and programmes, and that the implementation of this MoU will
strengthen their on-going efforts, while providing a further basis for the other Range States to
develop their own national strategies;
Acknowledging their shared responsibility to conserve the Monk Seal, especially those
populations frequenting cross-border terrestrial and marine areas, and the desirability of
encouraging all Range States, as well as non-governmental organizations, to take part in a
joint initiative to implement this MoU and the Action Plan; and
Confirming that the Range States of the Monk Seal have the first responsibility to implement
this MoU.
DECIDE to work closely together to improve the conservation status and the habitat of the
Eastern Atlantic populations of the Monk Seal throughout its range.
To this end, in a spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation, they will individually or
collectively:
l. Take steps to conserve and, when and where appropriate, to strictly protect the Monk
Seal and to conserve and promote the sustainable use of the habitats essential for its
survival.
2. Take steps to ratify the most relevant international conventions addressing Monk
Seal's conservation, in order to reinforce the species' protection.
3
3. Subject to the availability of resources, implement in their respective countries the
provisions of the Action Plan annexed to this MoU as a basis for conserving all
populations of the species in the Eastern Atlantic. The Action Plan will include inter
alia measures to: (a) evaluate the status and threats of monk seals; (b) maintain and
increase Monk Seal populations; ( c) create a network of protected areas for the Monk
Seal; and ( d) promote the regional coordination of actions between the Range States.
These objectives would be accomplished, in large part through the, development and
implementation of national Monk Seal conservation and management strategies and
action plans, effective international cooperation among the Range States involved and
an increased liaison and coordination between the Barcelona Convention and CMS.
4. Facilitate through the Atlantic Monk Seal Working Group, the rapid exchange of
scientific, technical and legal information necessary to coordinate conservation
measures and to cooperate with recognized experts and scientists, other international
organizations and other Range States so as to facilitate their work conducted in
relation to the MoU and Action Plan.
5. Assess the implementation of this MoU, including the Action Plan, at regular
meetings to be attended by representatives of each of the authorities concerned and
persons or organizations technically qualified in the conservation of the Monk Seal.
The Range States, in liaison with the CMS Secretariat, will convene such meetings.
6. The signatory authorities shall appoint a technical advisor in consultation with the
CMS Secretariat, to facilitate the implementation of the MoU and Action Plan. The
technical advisor will be fully involved with any meeting preparations and shall
participate in any relevant meetings, whether regular or extraordinary, as well as the
work of this Memorandum.
7. Designate a competent authority to serve as a contact point for the other signatories
and communicate without delay the name and contact details of this authority (and
any changes thereto) to the CMS Secretariat.
8. Provide the CMS Secretariat at least every two years after the date of the
Memorandum's entry into effect with a report on implementation of the MoU in each
of their respective countries. The CMS Secretariat will transmit to each of the Range
States and the co-operating organizations all of the reports received.
9. This MoU will be considered an agreement under CMS article N, paragraph 4.
I 0. The Action Plan annexed to this MoU is an integral part thereof.
11. This MoU will take effect immediately for those Range States that have signed it. It
will remain open for signature indefinitely, and will become effective for each
subsequent Range State on the date of signature. The MoU will remain in effect
indefinitely subject to the right of any signatory to terminate its participation by
providing one year's written notice to all of the other signatories.
12. Each signatory accepts financing the collaboration foreseen in the framework of this
MoU according to its ordinary budget availability and always in conformity with the
national legislation.
4
13. This MoU, including the Action Plan, may be amended by a consensus of all
signatories.
14. Nothing in this MoU will be legally binding on any of the signatories either
individually or collectively.
15. Nothing in this MoU will preclude signatories from implementing stronger measures
than those specified in the Action Plan, in accordance with international law.
16. All Atlantic Range States of the Monk Seal will be eligible to sign this Memorandum
of Understanding.
17. The signatory States, in consultation with CMS, shall agree upon the establishment of
a Secretariat to facilitate the implementation of the MoU.
18. The working languages for all matters related to this MoU will be Arabic, English,
French, Spanish and Portuguese.
5
