MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON THE CONSERVATION OF SOUTHERN SOUTH AMERICAN
MIGRATORY GRASSLAND BIRD SPECIES AND THEIR HABITATS
The Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development of Argentina
The Vice Ministry of Biodiversity, Natural Resources and Environment of Bolivia
The Ministry of Environment of Paraguay
The Ministry of Animal Husbandry, Agriculture and Fishing of Urnguay
Concerned that the populations of several species of migratory birds inhabiting the grasslands
of Southern South America have been subject to a drastic reduction and fragmentation of their
habitats and have a delicate state of conservation;
Aware that, according to IUCN, the global conservation status of Numenius borealis and
Sporophila zelichi is  "Critically Endangered "; that of S. palustris is  "Endangered "; that of
Alectrurus risora, A. tricolor, S. cinnamomea and Agelaius (Xanthopsar) fl.avus is
 "Vulnerable "; and that of Polystictus pectoralis pectoralis, S. hypochroma, S. ruf1collis, and
T,yngites subruficollis is  "Nearly Threatened ";
Noting too that N. borealis, T subruficollis, A. risora, A. tricolor, S. cinnamomea, S.
hypochroma, S. palustris, S. zelichi, and Agelaius (Xanthopsar) fl.avus have been included on
Appendix I of the Convention on Migratory Species (CMS) because they are considered
endangered and, as a result, CMS Contracting Parties that are Range States of these species
must take steps to protect them pursuant to Article III of the Convention;
Noting further that all species mentioned in the preceding paragraph, S. ru.ficollis and P.
pectoralis pectoralis have been included on Appendix II of CMS and, as a result, CMS
Contracting Parties that are Range States are to endeavour to conclude agreements where this
would benefit the species;
Acknowledging that the species referred to migrate annually between breeding and wintering
areas including the grasslands of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay at least
during part of the year, and that they depend on the conservation of the habitats found there;
Concerned that the fragmentation of grassland habitats, hunting and illegal capture and/or
trade have been the main reasons for the drop in the populations of these species; and
Acknowledging that, although the Range States have endeavoured individually to ensure their
conservation, coordinated and concerted actions across the migratory range are still required
to prevent the last populations of these birds from disappearing and to improve their
conservation status;
DECIDE to work together to improve the conservation status of the species throughout their
breeding and wintering ranges. To this end, in a spirit of mutual understanding and
cooperation, they will:
1. Provide effective protection for the populations of grassland birds mentioned, and for
the habitats upon which their survival depends;
2. Develop an Action Plan to protect the species and their habitats, which should guide
the conservation actions of the signatories and, which should inter alia include
measures to promote co-ordination of these actions, international cooperation,
improving the knowledge on these species, management, research, awareness and the
exchange of information among the signatories. The Action Plan will be annexed to
this Memorandum of Understanding after its endorsement by the first meeting of the
signatories;
3. Designate respectively in each country a scientific coordinator to serve as a focal point
to communicate with the other signatories and to guide the implementation of
activities under this Memorandum of Understanding, and communicate the full
contact details of this person (and any changes thereto) to the Secretariat;
4. Assess the implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding and the Action Plan
at regular meetings of representatives of each of the signatories, and persons or
organisations technically qualified in the conservation of the species. Such meetings
shall be convened by the Secretariat, and hosted by and organised in collaboration
with one of the undersigned authorities or a co-operating organisation; and
5. Provide to the Secretariat a regular report on their implementation of this
Memorandum of Understanding, the fom1at for and the frequency of which will be
detennined by the first meeting of the signat01ies. The Secretariat will make available
to the signatories the reports received, together with an overview report of progress
made to implement the Memorandum of Understanding and the Action Plan. This will
be compiled on the basis of all infonnation available.
Basic Principles
6. This Memorandum of Understanding is an agreement under Article IV, paragraph 4,
of CMS and is not legally binding.
7. The Action Plan will be an integral part of this Memorandum of Understanding.
8. This Memorandum of Understanding is open for signature by representatives of the
authorities listed above. It will take effect with three signatures. It will become
effective for each subsequent signatory on the date of signature.
9. This Memorandum of Understanding will remain open for signature indefinitely, and
will remain in effect indefinitely subject to the right of any signatory to terminate its
participation by providing one year's written notice to all other signatories.
2
I 0. The Memorandum of Understanding, including the Action Plan, may be amended by a
consensus of the signatories.
11. The original text of this Memorandum of Understanding, in the Spanish and English
languages, shall be deposited with the CMS Secretariat, which will act as the
depositary. In the event of any discrepancies, the Spanish version will be considered
definitive. The working language for all matters related to this Memorandum of
Understanding will be Spanish and, for purposes of paragraph 5, English, depending
on the Spanish language capacity of the Secretariat.
12. The CMS Secretariat will act as the secretariat to this Memorandum of Understanding.
It may use the services of any reliable organisation to support the Memorandum's
coordination.
13. The implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and the Action Plan will
be subject to the availability of human and financial resources within the respective
countries.
3
En representacion de las autoridades respectivas arriba mencionadas:
On behalf of the respective authorities referred to above:
