MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING CONSERNING CONSERVATION MEASURES FOR THE SIBERIAN CRANE

among

The Chairman, State Committee on Ecology and Nature 
Utilization Control, Azerbaijan
The Director General, State Forestry Administration, 
China
The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, 
India 
The Head of the Department of Environment, Islamic 
Republic of Iran
The Minister of Ecology and Natural Resources, Kazakstan
The Minister of Environment, Local Government and Rural 
Development, Pakistan
The Chairman, State Committee on Environmental 
Protection, Russian Federation* 
The Minister of Natural Resource Use and Environmental 
Protection, Turkmenistan
The Chairman, State Committee for Nature Protection, 
Uzbekistan
The appropriate authority (to be specified upon 
signature) of Afghanistan

The undersigned, acting on behalf of the respective 
authorities named above,
Aware that the western and central populations of the 
Siberian Crane, Grus leucogeranus, have been reduced to 
the brink of extinction, and that the status of the 
eastern population is threatened;

Recognizing that the Siberian Crane has the longest 
migration route of all crane species, ranging from 
breeding areas in the Arctic regions of Asia to 
wintering grounds in southern Asia, and that the species 
is highly dependent on the conservation of shallow 
wetlands for its survival;

Concerned that hunting and loss of wetlands, 
particularly in southern Asia, are thought to have been 
responsible for the decline in the numbers of Siberian 
Cranes;

Conscious that concerted, co-ordinated action must be 
taken immediately to prevent the disappearance of the 
remaining populations;

Acknowledging their shared responsibility for the 
conservation and wise management of the Siberian Crane 
and the wetland habitats on which the species depends, 
and the desirability of involving all Range States of 
the western, central and eastern populations of the 
species in common initiatives;

AGREE to work closely together to improve the 
conservation status of the Siberian Crane throughout its 
breeding, migrating and wintering range.

To that end, in a spirit of mutual understanding and 
co-operation, they shall:
1. Provide strict protection for Siberian Cranes and 
identify and conserve the wetland habitats essential for 
their survival;
2. Subject to availability of resources, implement in 
their respective countries the provisions of the 
Conservation Plan annexed to this memorandum as a basis 
for conserving the western, central and eastern 
populations of the species. The Conservation Plan shall 
aim to reduce mortality, increase numbers and genetic 
diversity, and enhance international co-operation, and 
shall include inter alia: measures to protect the 
traditional breeding, staging and wintering areas of the 
Siberian Crane; provisions for the identification of key 
sites for breeding, migrating and wintering Siberian 
Cranes and the preparation of national action plans; 
detailed proposals for monitoring, research and 
practical measures for the rehabilitation of Siberian 
Crane populations; and proposals for the establishment 
of a funding mechanism for these conservation measures. 
Implementation of the Memorandum, including the 
Conservation Plan, shall be assessed at regular meetings 
to be attended by representatives of each of the 
Governments concerned and persons or agencies 
technically qualified in the conservation of Siberian 
Cranes. Such meetings shall be convened by the 
Secretariat of the Convention on the Conservation of 
Migratory Species of Wild Animals (1979), and shall be 
hosted by and organized in collaboration with one of the 
Range States or Co-operating Organizations. 
3. Facilitate the expeditious exchange of scientific, 
technical and legal information needed to co-ordinate 
conservation measures; and co-operate with recognized 
scientists of international organizations and other 
Range States in order to facilitate their work conducted 
in relation to the Conservation Plan; 
4. Designate a competent authority to serve as a contact 
point for the other Parties and communicate without 
delay the name and contact details of this authority 
(and any changes thereto) to the Secretariat of the 
Convention on Migratory Species;
5. Provide to the Secretariat of the Convention on 
Migratory Species, by 31 March of each year, a report on 
implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding in 
each of the respective countries. The Secretariat shall 
transmit to each of the Range States all of the reports 
received, together with an overview report which it 
shall compile on the basis of information at its 
disposal.

Basic principles
1. This Memorandum of Understanding shall be considered 
an agreement under Article IV, paragraph 4, of the 
Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of 
Wild Animals. It supercedes the Memorandum of 
Understanding of the same name adopted at Kushiro in 
June 1993. The Memorandum shall take effect on 1 January 
1999 for those two or more Range States that have signed 
it. It shall remain open for signature indefinitely, and 
shall become effective for all other signatory States on 
the first day of the first month following the date on 
which they sign. The Memorandum of Understanding shall 
remain in effect indefinitely subject to the right of 
any Party to terminate its participation by providing 
one year's written notice to all of the other Parties. 
2. The Memorandum of Understanding, including the 
Conservation Plan, may be amended by a consensus of all 
of the signatory States. 
3. The working language for all matters related to this 
Memorandum of Understanding shall be English.
Done at Ramsar on this thirteenth day of December, 1998.
                       

