THE NORDIC ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONVENTION 

Adopted at Stockholm on 19 February 1974


      Convention on the Protection of the Environment between
Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden

      The Governments of Denmark, Finland Norway and Sweden,
convinced of the urgent need to protect and improve the environment,
have agreed as follows:


Article 1

      For the purpose of this Convention environmentally harmful
activities shall mean the discharge from the soil or from buildings
or installations of solid or liquid waste, gas or any other
substance into water courses, lakes or the sea and the use of land,
the seabed, buildings or installations in any other way which
entails or may entail environmental nuisance by water pollution or
any other effect on water conditions, sand drift, air pollution,
noise, vibration, changes in temperature, ionizing radiation, light
etc.

      The Convention shall not apply insofar as environmentally
harmful activities are regulated by a special agreement between two
or more of the Contracting States.


Article 2

      In considering the permissibility of environmentally harmful
activities, the nuisance which such activities entail or may entail
in another Contracting States shall be equated with a nuisance in
the States where the activities are carried out.


Article 3

      Any person who is affected or may be affected by a nuisance
caused by environmentally harmful activities in another Contracting
State shall have the right to bring before the appropriate Court or
Administrative Authority of that State the question of the
permissibility of such activities including the question of measures
to prevent damage, and to appeal against the decision of the Court
or the Administrative Authority to the same extent and on the same
terms as a legal entity of the State in which the activities are
being carried out.

      The provisions of the first paragraph of this Article shall be
equally applicable in the case of proceedings concerning
compensation for damage caused by environmentally harmful
activities. The question of compensation shall not be judged by
rules which are less favourable to the injured party than the rules
of compensation of the State in which the activities are being
carried out.


Article 4

      Each State shall appoint a special authority (supervisory
authority) to be entrusted with the task of safeguarding general
environmental interests insofar as regards nuisances arising out of
environmentally harmful activities in another Contracting State.
For the purpose of safeguarding such interests, the supervisory
authority shall have the right to institute proceedings before or be
heard by the competent Court or Administrative Authority of another
Contracting State regarding the permissibility of the
environmentally harmful activities if an authority or other
representative of general environmental interests in that State can
institute proceedings or be heard in matters of this kind, as well
as the right to appeal against the decision of the Court or the
Administrative Authority in accordance with the procedures and rules
of appeal applicable to such cases in the State concerned.


Article 5

      If the Court or the Administrative Authority examining the
permissibility of environmentally harmful activities (examining
authority) finds that the activities entail or may entail nuisance
of significance in another Contracting State, the examining
authority shall, if proclamation or publication is required in cases
of that nature, send as soon as possible a copy of the documents of
the case to the supervisory authority of the other State, and afford
it the opportunity of giving its opinion. Notification of the date
and place of a meeting or inspection shall, where appropriate, be
given well in advance to the supervisory authority which, moreover,
shall be kept informed of any developments that may be of interest
to it.


Article 6

      Upon the request of the supervisory authority, the examining
authority shall, insofar as compatible with the procedural rules of
the States in which the activities are being carried out, require
the applicant for a permit to carry out environmentally harmful
activities to submit such additional particulars, drawings and
technical specifications as the examining authority deems necessary
for evaluating the effects in the other State. 


Article 7

      The supervisory authority, if it finds it necessary on account
of public or private interests, shall publish communications from
the examining authority in the local newspaper or in some other
suitable manner. The supervisory authority shall also institute such
investigations of the effects in its own State as it deems
necessary.


Article 8

      Each State shall defray the cost of the activities of its
supervisory authority.


Article 9

      If, in a particular case, the supervisory authority has
informed the appropriate Court of Administrative authority of the
State in which the activities are being carried out that in the case
concerned the duties of the supervisory authority shall be
discharged by another authority, the provisions of this Convention
relating to supervisory activities shall, where appropriate, apply
to that authority.


Article 10

      If necessary for determining the damage caused in another
State by environmentally harmful activities, the supervisory
authority of that other State shall upon request of the examining
authority of the State in which the activities are being carried out
make arrangements for on-site inspection. The examining authority or
an expert appointed by it may be present at such an inspection.

      Where necessary, more detailed instructions concerning
inspections such as referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be
drawn up in consultation between the countries concerned.


Article 11

      Where the permissibility of environmentally harmful activities
which entail considerable nuisance in another Contracting State is
being examined by the Government or by the appropriate Minister or
Ministry of the State in which the activities are being carried out,
consultations shall take place between the States concerned if the
Government of the former State so requests.


Article 12

      In cases such as those referred to in Article 11, the
Government of each State concerned may demand that an opinion be
given by a Commission which, unless otherwise agreed, shall consist
of a chairman from another Contracting State to be appointed jointly
by the parties and three members from each of the States concerned.
Where such a Commission has been appointed, the case cannot be
decided upon until the Commission has given its opinion.

      Each State shall remunerate the members it has appointed. Fees
or other remuneration of the Chairman as well as any other costs
incidental to the activities of the Commission which are not
manifestly the responsibility of one or the other State, shall be
equally shared by the States concerned.


Article 13

      This Convention shall also apply to the continental shelf
areas of the Contracting States.


Article 14

      This Convention shall enter into force six months from the
date on which all the Contracting States have notified the Swedish
Ministry for Foreign Affairs that the constitutional measures
necessary for the entry into force of the Convention have been
implemented. The Swedish Ministry of Foreign Affairs shall notify
the other Contracting States of the receipt of such communications.


Article 15

      Actions or cases relevant to this Convention, which are
pending before a Court or an Administrative Authority on the date
when this Convention enters into force, shall be dealt with and
judged according to provisions previously in force.


Article 16

      Any Contracting State wishing to denounce this Convention
shall give notice of its intention in writing to the Swedish
Government, which shall forthwith inform the other Contracting
States of the denunciation and of the date on which notice was
received.

      The denunciation shall take effect twelve months from the date
on which the Swedish Government received such notification or on
such later date as may be indicated in the notice of denunciation.
This Convention shall be deposited with the Swedish Ministry for
Foreign Affairs, which shall send certified copies thereof to the
Government of each Contracting State.

In witness whereof the undersigned, representative of the
Contracting States, being duly authorized thereto by their
respective Governments, have signed this Convention.

Done at Stockholm, this 19th day of February 1974 in a single copy
in the Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish languages, all texts
being equally authoritative.



PROTOCOL

      In connection with the signing today of the Nordic
Environmental Protection Convention the duly authorized signatories
agreed that the following comments on its application shall be
appended to the Convention.

      In the applications of Article I discharge from the soil, or
from buildings or installations of solid or liquid waste, gases or
other substances into watercourses, lakes or the sea shall be
regarded as environmentally harmful activities only if the discharge
entails or may entail a nuisance to the surroundings.

      The right established in Article 3 for anyone who suffers
injury as result of environmentally harmful activities in a
neighbouring State to institute proceedings for compensation before
a court or administrative authority of that State shall, in
principle, be regarded as including the right to demand the purchase
of his real property.

      Article 5 shall be regarded as applying also to application
for permits where such applications are referred to certain
authorities and organizations for their opinion but not in
conjunction with proclamation or publication procedures.

      The Contracting States shall require officials of the
supervisory authority to observe professional secrecy as regards
trade secrets, operational devices or business conditions of which
they have become cognizant in dealing with cases concerning
environmentally harmful activities in another State.

Stockholm, 19th February, 1974.


                             *****
