PROTOCOL CONCERNING PROTECTED AREAS
AND WILD FAUNA AND FLORA
IN THE EASTERN AFRICAN REGION
The Conlracling Parties to the present Protocol,
Being Parties lo the Convention for the Protection, Management and
Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the Eastern
African Region, done at Nairobi on 21 June 1985,
Conscious of the danger from increasing human activities which is
threatening the environment of the Eastern African region,
Recognizing that natural resources constitute a heritage of scientific,
cultural, educational, recreational and economic value that needs to be
effectively protected,
S!ressing the importance of protecting and, as appropriate, improving
the slate of the wild fauna and flora and natural habitats of the Eastern
African region among other means by the establishment of specially protected
areas in the marine and coastal environment,
Desirous of establishing close co-operation among themselves in order
to achieve that objective,
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
DEr-JNJTIONS
For the purposes of this Protocol:
(a)   \"Eastern African region  \" means the Convention area as defined
in paragraph (a) of article 2 of the Convention. ll shall also include the
coastal areas of the Contracting Parties and their internal waters related lo
the marine and coastal environment;
(b)   \"Convention  \" means the Convention for the Protection, Management
and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the
Eastern African Region;
(c)   \"Organization  \" means the body referred to in paragraph (c) of
article 2 of the Convention.
Article 2
GENERAL UNDERTAKING
I. The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
maintain essential ecological processes and life support systems, to
preserve genetic diversity, and to ensure the sustainable utilization of
harvested natural resources under their jurisdiction. In particular, the
Contracting Parties shall endeavour to protect and preserve rare or fragile
ecosystems as well as rare, depleted, threatened or endangered species of
wild fauna and flora and their habitats in the Eastern African region.
2. To this end, the Contracting Parties shall develop national conservation
strategies and co-ordinate, if appropriate, such strategies within the
framework of regional conservation activities.
Article 3
PROTECTION OF WILD FLORA
The Conlracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures to ensure
the protection of the wild flora species specified in annex I. To this end,
each Contracting Party shall, as appropriate, prohibit activities having
adverse effects on the habitats of such species, as well as the uncontrolled
picking, collecting, cutting or uprooting of such species. Each Contracting
Party shall, as appropriate, prohibit the possession or sale of such species.
Article 4
SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA REQUIRING SPECIAL PROTECTION
The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures lo ensure
the strictest protection of the endangered wild fauna species listed in
annex II. To this end, each Contracting Party shall strictly regulate and,
where required, prohibit activities having adverse effects on the habitats of
such species, In particular, the following activities shall, where required, be
prohibited with regard to such species:
(a) All forms of capture, keeping or killing;
(b) Damage to, or destruction of, critical habitats;
(c) Disturbance of wild fauna, particularly during the period of breeding,
rearing and hibernation;
(d) Destruction or taking of eggs from the wild or keeping these eggs
even if empty;
(e) Possession of and internal trade in these animals, alive or dead,
including stuffed animals and any readily recognisable part or derivative
thereof.
A rtic/e 5
HARVESTABLE SPECIES OF WILD FAUNA
I. The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
ensure the protection of the depleted or threatened wild fauna species listed
in annex Ill.
2. Any exploitation of such wild fauna species shall be regulated in
order to restore and maintain the populations at optimum levels. Each
Contracting Party shall develop, adopt and implement management plans
for the exploitation of such species which may include:
(a) The prohibition of the use of all indiscriminate means of capture
and killing and of the use of all means capable of causing local disappearance
of, or serious disturbance to, populations of a species;
(b) Closed seasons and other procedures regulating exploitation;
{c) The temporary or local prohibition of exploitation, as appropriate,
in order to restore viable population levels;
(d) The regulation, as appropriate, of sale, keeping for sale, transport
for sale or offering for sale of live and dead wild animals;
(e) The safeguarding of breeding stocks of such species and their critical
habitats in protected areas designated in accordance with article 8 of
this Protocol;
(f) Exploitation in captivity.
Article 6
MIGRATORY SPECIES
The Contracting Parties shall, in addition to the measures specified in
articles 3, 4 and 5, co-ordinate their efforts for the protection of migratory
species listed in annex IV whose range extends into their ,territories. To this
end, each Contracting Party shall ensure that, where appropriate, the
closed seasons and other measures referred to in paragraph 2 of article 5
are also applied with regard to such migratory species,
Article 7
INTRODUCTION OF ALIEN OR NEW SPECIES
The Contracting Parties shall take all appropriate measures to prohibit
the intentional or accidental introduction of alien or new species
which may cause significant or harmful changes to the Eastern African
region.
Article 8
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROTECTED AREAS
1. The Contracting Parties shall, where necessary, establish protected
areas in areas under their jurisdiction with a view lo safeguarding the
natural resources of the Eastern African region and shall take all appropriate
measures to protect those areas.
2. Such areas shall be established in order to safeguard:
(a) The ecological and biological processes essential to the functioning
or the Eastern African region;
(b) Representative samples or all types or ecosystems or the Eastern
African region;
(c) Populations or the greatest possible number or species or fauna
and flora depending on these ecosystems;
(d) Areas having a particular importance by reason or their scientific,
apthetic, cultural or educational purposes.
3. In establishing protected areas, the Contracting Parties shall lake
into account, inter aUa, their importance as:
(a) Natural habitats, and in particular as critical habitats, for species
or fauna and flora, especially those which are rare, threatened or endemic;
(b) Migration routes or as wintering, staging, feeding or moulting
sites for migratory species;
(c) Areas necessary for the maintenance or stocks or economically
important marine species;
(d) Reserves or genetic resources;
(e) Rare or fragile ecosystems;
(f) Areas or interest for scientific research and monitoring.
Article 9
COMMON GUIDELtNES, STANDARDS OR CRITERtA
The Contracting Parties shall, al their first meeting, and in cooperation
with the competent regional and international organizations,
formulate and adopt guidelines, standards or criteria concerning the identification,
selection, establishment and management or protected areas.
Anic/e JO
PROTECTtON MEASURES
The Contracting Parties, taking into account the characteristics or
eacli protected area, shall take, in conformity with international law, the
measures required to achieve the objectives or protecting the area, which
may include:
(a) The organization or a planning and management system;
(b) The prohibition or the dumping or discharge or wastes or other
matter which may impair the protected areas;
(c) The regulation or pleasure craft activities;
(d) The regulation or fishing and hunting and or the capture or
animals and harvesting of plants;
(e) The prohibition of the destruction of plant life or animals;
(f) The regulation of any act likely to harm or disturb the fauna or
flora, including the introduction of non-indigenous animal or plant
species;
(g) The regulation of any activity involving the exploration or exploitation
of the sea-bed or its subsoil or a modification of the sea-bed profile;
(h) The regulation of any activity involving a modification of the profile
of the soil or the exploitation of the subsoil of the coastal area;
(1) The regulation of any archaeological activity and of the removal of
any object which may be considered as an archaeological object;
(j) The regulation of trade in and import and export of animals, parts
of animals, plants, parts of plants and archaeological objects which originate
in protected areas and are subject to measures of protection;
(k) Any other measure aimed at safeguarding ecological and biological
processes in protected areas.
Article I I
BUFFER AREAS
The Contracting Parties may strengthen the protection of a protected
area by establishing, within areas under their jurisdiction, one or more buffer
areas in which activities are less severely restricted while remaining compatible
with the purposes of the protected area.
Article 12
TRADITIONAL ACTIVITIES
I. The Contracting Parties shall, in promu!Fating protective
measures, take into account the traditional activities of their local populations
in the areas to be protected. To the fullest extent possible, no
exemption which is allowed for this reason shall be such as:
(a) to endanger either the maintenance of ecosystems protected under
the terms of the present Protocol or the biological processes contributing to
the maintenance of those ecosystems;
(b) to cause either the extinction of, or any substantial reduction in,,
the number of individuals making up the species of animal or plant populations
within the protected ecosystems, or any ecologically connected
species or populations, particularly migratory, endemic, rare, depleted,
threatened or endangered species.
2. Contracting Parties which allow exemptions under paragraph I of
this article with regard to protective measures shall inform the Organization
accordingly.
Article /3
FRONTIER PROTECTED AREAS
I. If a Conlracting Party intends to establish a protected area contiguous
to the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national jurisdiction of
another Contracting Party, the two Contracting Parties shall, us necessary,
consult each other with a view to reaching agreement on the measures to be
taken and shall, among other things, examine the possibility of the establishment
by the other Party of a corresponding protected area or buffer
area 1
2. If a Contracting Party intends to establish a protected area contiguous
to the frontier or to the limits of the zone of national jurisdiction of
a State which is not a party to this Protocol, the Party shall endeavour to
work together with that State with a view to holding consultations as
referred to in the preceding paragraph.
3. If a State which is not a party to this Protocol intends to establish
a protected area contiguous to the frontier or to the limits of the zone of
national jurisdiction of a Contracting Party to this Protocol, the latter
shall endeavour to work together with that State with a view to holding
consultations.
Article /4
PUULICITY AND NOTlrlCATION
The Contracting Parties shall give appropriate publicity to the establishment
of protected areas, in particular to their boundaries and the
regulations applying thereto. Such information shall be transmitted to the
Organization which shall compile and maintain a current directory of
protected areas in the Eastern African region. The Contracting Parties
shall provide the Organization with all information necessary for that
purpose.
Article 15
Puuuc INFORMATION AND EDUCATION
The Contracting Parties shall endeavour to inform the public as
widely as possible of the significance and interest of protected areas and the
protection of wild fauna and flora and the scientific knowledge which may
be gained from them. Such information should have an appropriate place
in education programmes concerning the environment, archaeology and
history. The Contracting Parties should also endeavour to promote the
participation of their public and their nature conservation organizations in
the protection of the areas and wild fauna and flora concerned.
Article /6
REGIONAL CO-OPERATION
The Contracting Parties shall establish a regional programme to coordinate
the selection, establishment, and management, of protected areas
and the protection of wild fauna and flora with a view to creating a
representative network of protected areas in the Eastern African region.
There shall be regular exchanges of information concerning the characteristics
of the protected areas and wild fauna and flora, the experience
acquired and the problems encountered,
Article 17
SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL RESEARCH
I. The Contracting Parties shall encourage and develop scientific
and technical research on their protected areas and on the ecosystems, wild
fauna and flora, and archaeological heritage of the Eastern African region.
2. The Contracting Parties shall exchange scientific and technical
information concerning current or planned research and their results. They
shall, to the fullest extent possible, co-ordinate their research, and define
jointly or standardize the scientific methods to be applied in the selection,
management and monitoring of protected areas.
Article /8
EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION
1. In applying the principles of co-operation set forth in articles 16
and 17, the Contracting Parties shall forward lo the Organization:
(a) Comparable information for monitoring the biological development
of the Eastern African region;
(b) Inventories, publications and information of a scientific, administrative
and legal nature, in particular:
(i) On the measures taken by the Contracting Parties in pursuance of
this Protocol for the protection of the protected areas and wild
fauna and flora;
(ii) On the wild fauna and flora present in the protected areas or
listed in the annexes lo this Protocol;
(iii) On any threats to protected areas or wild fauna and flora, especially
those threats which may come from sources outside their
control;
(iv) On any changes in the delimitation or legal status of a prolt,cted
area or the suppression of all or part of such an area.
2. The Contracting Parties shall designate persons responsible for
protected areas. Those persons shall meet al least once every two years lo
discuss matters of joint interest and especially to propose to the Contracting
Parties recommendations concerning scientific, administrative and
legal measures lo be adopted to improve the application of the provisions
of this Protocol.
Arlicle 19
TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION
The Contracting Parties shall co-operate, directly or with the assistance
of competent regional or international organizations, in the provision
to other Contracting Parties of technical and other assistance in fields
related to the selection, establishment and management of protected areas
and the protection of wild fauna and flora. Such assistance should relate,
in particular, to the training of scientific, technical and managerial personnel and 
scientific research.
Arlicle 20
ALTERATION OF THE BOUNDARIES OF OR WITHDRAWAL
OF PROTECTION FROM, PROTECTED AREAS
Changes in the delimitation or legal status of a protected area, or the
suppression of all or part of such an area, shall not take place unless for
significant reasons, taking into account the need to protect the environment
and according to the rules and obligations provided in this Protocol.
Arlicle 21
MEETINGS OF THE PARTIES
1. Ordinary meetings of the Contracting Parties to this Protocol
shall be held in conjunction with ordinary meetings of the Contracting Parties
to the Convention held pursuant to article 17 of the Convention. The
Contracting Parties to this Protocol may also hold extraordinary meetings
as provided for in article 17 of the Convention.
2. It shall be the function of the meetings of the Contracting Parties
to this Protocol, in particular:
(a) To keep under review the implementation of this Protocol;
(b) To consider the efficacy of the measures adopted and to examine
the need for other measures, in particular in the form of annexes in conformity
with the provisions of article 20 of the Convention;
(c) To adopt, review and amend as required any annex to this
Protocol;
. (d) To monitor the establishment and development of the network of
protected areas referred to in article 16, to adopt guidelines to facilitate the
establishment and development of that system and to increase co-operation
among the Contracting Parties;
(e) To consider the recommendations made by the meetings of the
persons responsible for the protected areas, as provided by article 18, paragraph
2;
(f) To consider, as appropriate, information transmitted by the
Contracting Parties to this Protocol to the Organization under article 23 of
the Convention.
Article 22
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THIS PROTOCOL AND THE CONVENTION
I. The provisions of the Convention relating to its protocols shall
apply with respect to this Protocol.
2. The rules of procedure and the financial rules adopted pursuant to
article 2 1 of the Convention shall apply to this Protocol, unless the
Contracting Parties to this Protocol agree otherwise.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by their
respective Governments, have signed this Protocol.
DONE at Nairobi this twenty-first day of June one thousa.nd nine
hundred and eighty-five in a single copy in the English and French
languages, the two texts being equally authentic.
ANNEX I
Protected species of wild flora
Uvariode11dro11 gorgonis Verde, (Kenya)
Grevia madagascariensis Bail!. subsp. keniensis Verde, (Kenya)
Saintpaulia rupicola B . L . Burtt (Kenya)
Beccariophrenix madagascariensis Jumellc & Perr. (Madagascar)
Crinum mauritianum Lodd. (Mauritius)
Tetra/axis salicifolia (Thouars ex Tu!.) Baker (Mauritius)
Zanthoxylum panicu/atum Balf. f. (Mauritius, Rodrigues)
Hibiscus liliif/orus Cav. (Mauritius, Rodrigues)
Lodoice(I maldivica (J. F. Gmelin) Pers. (Seychelles)
Toxocarp11s schimperianus Hemsley (Seychelles)
Peponium sublitorale C. Jeffrey & J. S. Page (Seychelles, 1 Aldabrn)
ANNEX II
Species of wild fuuna requiring special prolcrlion
MAMMAl.5
Zanzibar red colobus (Colobus badius kirkit)
Zanzibar stmi {Neolragus moschartus moschatus)
Mnuritius fruit bnt (Pteropus niger)
Rodrigues fruit bnt (Pteropus rodricensis)
Dugong (Dugong dugon)
Humpback whale (Megaptera novaengliae)

Lemurs {Lemur spp.)
Nosy Be sportive lemur (Lepilemur dorsalis)
Coquerel's mouse lemur {Microcebus coquerelt)
Aye nye (Daubentonia madagascariensis)
Birds
Sokoke pipit (Anthus sokokensis)
Sokoke scops owl (Otus ireneae)
Amani sunbird (Anthreptes pallidigaster)
East coast akalat (Sheppardia gunningi gunningi)
Pemba scops owl (Otus rutilus pembaensis)
Wattled crane (Bugeranus carunculatus)
Clarke's weaver (Ploceus golandi)
Spotted ground thrush (Turdus fisheri fisheri)
Aldabra white-throated rail (Dr yolimmas cuvieri aldabramus)
Aldabra brush warbler (Nesillas aldabranus)
Aldabra sacred ibis (Threskironis aeethiopica)
Aldabra kestrel (Falco newtoni aldabranus)
Mauritius kestrel (Falco punctatus)
Seychelles magpie robin (Copyschus sechellarum)
Seychelles fody (Foudia flavicans)
Rodriquez fody (Foudia flavicans)
Seychelles brush warbler (Acrocephalus sechellensis)
Seychelles turtle dove (Streptopelia picturata rostrata)
Madagascar fish eagle (Haliaeetus vociferoides)
Reunion cuckoo-shrike (Coracina newtoni)
Madagascar heron (Ardea humbloti)
Grand Comoro Scops owl (Otus pauliani)
Grand Comoro flycatcher (Humblotia flavirostris)
Mount Karthala white-eye (Zosterops mouroniensis)
Grand Comoro drongo (Dkrurusfuscipennis)
Mayotte drongo (Dicrurus waldem)
Mascarene black petrel (Pterodroma aerrima)
Tai ta thrush (Tunllls helleri)
Hinde's pied babbler (Turdoides hindei)
Papyrus yellow warbler (Chloropeta gracilirostris)
Tana river cisticola (Cisticola restricta)
Turner's eremomela (Eremomela turnert)
Chapin's flycatcher (Muscirnpa lendu)
Madagascar little grebe (Tachybap111s pelzelnit)
Alaotra grebe (Tachybapfus rufovalatus)
Madagascar teal (Anas bemiert)
Madagascar pochard (Aythya innotala)
Mndagascnr serpent eagle (Eutriorchis astur)
White-breasted rncsite (Mesoenas l'ariegata)
Orown mesite (Mesoenas unicolor)
Subdesert mesile (Monias benschi)
Slender-billed flufftall {Sarothnmr warersi)
Saka!ava rail (Amaurornis o/ivieri)
Madagascar plover (C/mmdrius thoracicus)
Snail-eating coua (Cow, de/alandei}
Madagascar red owl {Tyro so1111w1tnei)
Short-legged ground-roller (Brachypleracias leptoso11111s)
Scaly ground-roller (Brachypteracias squamiger)
Roufous-headcd ground-roller (A te/omis rrossley1)
Long-tailed ground-roller ( Urate/ornis chimaera)
Yellow-bellied sun bird-asity (Neodrepanis hypoxamha)
Appcrt's greenbul (Phyllastreph11s apper/1)
Dusky grcenbul (Phyl/astrephus fenebrosus)
Grey-crowned grccnbul (Phyllastrepl111s cinereiceps)
Van Darn's vanga (Xe11opirostris damii)
Pollen's vanga (Xe11opirostris pol/em)
Benson's rockthrush (Monticola hensoi)
Madagascar ycllowbrow (Crossleyia xa11/lwphrys)
Red-tailed newtonia (Newtonia fano11anue)
Pink pigeon (Nesa?1/as mayer,)
Mauritius parakeet (Psirwcula eques)
Mauritius cuckoo-shrike (Coracina typirn)
Mnmitius black bulbul (Hypsipetes o/ivaceus)
Rodrigues warbler (A crocepha/11s rodericanus)
Mauritius olive white-eye (Zosterops ch/oronothus)
Mauritius fody (Fo11dia rubra)
Cape vulture (Gyps coprotheres)
Swynnerton's forest robin (Swy1111erto11ia sll'y1111er1011i)
Dappled mountain robin (/11fod11/atrix oros/ruth11s)
Thyolo alcthc (Ale/he choluensis)
Long-billed apalis (A po/is moreow)
Seychelles kestrel (Fa/co araea)
Seychelles scops owl (Ollis ins11laris)
Seychelles swiftlct (Col/ocalia elaphra)
Seychelles bin ck paradise flycatcher ( Terpsiplwne corl'ina)
Seychelles white-eye (Zo.'!lerops modes/us)
Somalia pigeon (Col11111bu o/iviae)
Ash's lark (/1,firqfm os/11)
Somali long-clawed lnrk (Heteromirafm archer,)
Warsangli linnet (A can/his joha,mis)
Shoebill (Baloeniceps rex)
Nduk eagle owl (Bubo l'osselen)
Uluguru bushshrike (Mo!oconolus olius)
Usambara ground robin (Dryacichloides 111011101111s)
lringa ground robin (Dryocich/oides /owet)
Karnmoja apalis (Apa/is karamojae)
Kungwe apalis (Apa/is argenrea)
Mrs. Morcau's warbler (Ba1h111ocerrns ll'inifredae)
Unnded green sunbircl (Anthreptes rubritorques)
Rufous winged sunbird (Nectarinia rufipennis)
Tanzanian mountain weaver (Ploceus nico/11)
REPTILES
Olive ridley 1urtlc (Lepidochelys o/ivoceo)
Loggerhead turtle (Caret/Cl cure/la)
Leatherback turtle (Dermoclwlys coriacea)
Serpent island gecko (Cyrtodocty/11s serpensin sula)
Round island day gecko (Phelsuma guenthen)
Round island skink (Leiolopisma telfairii)
Skink (Gongylomorplws bojerii)
Round island boa (Bolyeria 11111homrirwta)
Round island keel-scaled boa (Cosarea dussumien)
Aldabrn giant tortoise (Dipsochelys eleplwntina)
Madagascar tortoise (Geochelo11e yniphora)
Mol.l.USCS
Triton's  rumpet (Charania lritonia)
Commercial troclrns ( Truc!111s nilotic11s)
Fluted giant clam ( Trid(lcna sq11a111osa)
Small giant clam ( Tridac,w maxi111t1)
Horse's hoof clam (Hippop11s hippop11s)
Pearl oyster (Pincrada spp.)
CRUSTACEANS
Coconu1 crnb (Birg11s larro)
CNIDARIANS
Black coral (ll llfipathes diclw10111a)
Whip coral (Cirrhipathes spp.)
INSECTS
Tenebrionid beetle (Pulposipus herrnlean11s)
Comoro graphium bu1terfly (Oraphi11111 tevassari)
ANNEX I l l
Hnrvt'slublc spt'cit's of wild fnunn rt'quirinA prolecllon
Cane rats (Tllryo110111ys spp.)
African Elephant (loxudonw africano)
Rock hyrax (Procm1ia rnpensis)
Yellow spotted hyrax (Hererohyrax brucei)
Tree hyrax (Dcndrohyrax orbore11s)
Burchell's zebra (Eq1111s burchelh)
Hirpopotamus (Hippopo1am11s amphihius)
Warthog (Plwcochoerus aethiopicus)
Bush pig (Potamochaems porrns)
Lesser kudu ( Tragelaphus imberbis)
Common waterbllck (Kobus ellipsip1')11J11111s)
Topi (Damaliscus korrig11111)
Liclltenslein's lmrtebees1 (A lcelaphus lich1e11s1ei111)
Wildebeest (Co11110c/we1es w11ri1111s)
Impala (A epycl'ros 111l'la111p11s)
Grimm's duikcr (Sy/vicaum gl'i111111ia)
B11 ffalo (Symenis cq/JL1r)
Spiny lobsters (Pamilims spp.)
Green tunic (Chelonia 111ydas)
I lawksbill !urt IL (Ere111wchelys imhrirnfa)
ANNl(X I V
Proleeled migrntory sprcics
MM!t'IIAI.S
Dugong (D11go11g rlugon)
Humpback whale (Megautera 11011aeangliae)
IJ!ue whale ( Balac'IIOplera 11111srn/11s)
REPTILES
Green turtle (Che/011ia 111ydas)
Hnwksbill turtle (Erefmochelys imbricata)
Olive ridley turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea)
Loggerhead turtle (Carella care/fa)
Leathcrback turtle {Dermochelys coriacca)
