CONSTITUTION OF THE EUROPEAN COMMIS
SION FOR THE CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH
DISEASE. APPROVED BY THE CONFERENCE OF THE
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE
UNITED NATIONS, AT ITS SEVENTH SESSION, ROME,
11 DECEMBER 1953
PREAMBLE
Tho contracting Governments, having regard to the urgent necessity of
preventing the recurrence of the heavy losses to European agriculture caused
by the repeated outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease, hereby establish a Com
mission to be known as the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-
Mouth Disease, whose object shall be to promote national and international
action with respect to control measures against foot-and-mouth disease in Europe.
Article I
MEMBERSHIP
The Members of the European Commission for the Control of Foot-and-
Mouth Disease (hereinafter referred to as the "Commission") shall be such
European Member Nations of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (hereinafter referred to as the "Organization") and/or of the
International Office of Epizootics (hereinafter referred to as the "Office") as
accept this Constitution in accordance with the provisions of Article XV. The
Commission, by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast providing such majority
is greater than half of its membership, may, with the approval of the Council
of the Organization, in conformity with the provisions of Article XV (3), admit
to membership any other European Nation which has submitted an application
for membership and a declaration made in a formal instrument that it accepts
the obligations of this Constitution as in force at the time of admission.
The Organization, the Office and the Organization for European Economic
Cooperation shall have the right to be represented at all sessions of the Commis
sion and its Committees, but their representatives shall not have the right to vote.
Article II
OBLIGATIONS OF MEMBERS REGARDING NATIONAL POLICIES AND INTERNATIONAL
COOPERATION FOR THE CONTROL OF FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE
1. Members undertake to control foot-and-mouth disease with a view to
its ultimate eradication by the institution of suitable quarantine and sanitary
measures and by one or more of the following methods :
1) a slaughter policy
2) slaughter together with vaccination
3) maintenance of totally immune cattle population by vaccination
4) vaccination in zones surrounding outbreaks.
Methods adopted shall be rigorously carried out.
2. Members adopting policy 2 or 4 undertake to have available a supply
of virus for vaccine production and a supply of vaccine sufficient to ensure
adequate protection against the disease in case of an outbreak. Each Member
shall collaborate with and assist other Members in all concerted measures for the
control of foot-and-mouth disease, and in particular in the provision of vaccine
and virus where necessary. The quantities of virus and vaccine to be stored
for national and international use snail be determined by Members in the light
of the findings of the Commission and the advice of the Office.
3. Members shall make such arrangements for the typing of virus from
outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease as may be required by the Commission
and shall immediately notify the Commission and the Office of the results of
such typing.
4. Members undertake to provide the Commission with any information
which it may need to carry out its functions. In particular, Members shall
immediately report to the Commission and to the Office any outbreak of footand-
mouth disease and its extent and shall make such further detailed reports
as the Commission may require.
Article III
SEAT
1. The seat of the Commission and its Secretariat shall be in Rome at the
Headquarters of the Organization.
2. Sessions of the Commission shall be held at its seat, unless they are
convened elsewhere in pursuance of a decision of the Commission at a previous
session, or, in exceptional circumstances, of a decision of the Executive Com
mittee.
Article IV
GENERAL FUNCTIONS
The following shall be the general functions of the Commission :
1. To enter into arrangements, through the Director-General of the Or
ganization, with the Office within the framework of any agreements between
the Organization and the Office to ensure that :
1.1 All Members are provided with technical advice on any problem
relating to the control of foot-and-mouth disease.
1.2 Comprehensive information on outbreaks of the disease and
identification of virus is collected and disseminated as quickly as possible.
1.3 Special research work required on foot-and-mouth disease is
carried out.
2. To collect information on national programs for the control of, and re
search on, foot-and-mouth disease.
3. To determine, in consultation with the Members concerned, the nature
and extent of assistance needed by such Members for implementing their national
programs.
4. To stimulate and plan joint action wherever required to overcome diffi
culties in the implementation of control programs and to this effect arrange
means whereby adequate resources can be made available, for example, for the
production and storage of vaccine, through agreements between Members.
5. To arrange for suitable facilities for the typing of virus.
6. To study the possibility of establishing international laboratory facilities
to deal with the typing of virus and the production of vaccines.
7. To maintain a register of stocks of virus and vaccines available in various
countries and to keep the position continuously under review.
8. To offer advice to other organizations on the allocation of any available
funds for assisting in the control of foot-and-mouth disease in Europe.
9. To enter into arrangements, through the Director-General of the Or
ganization, with other organizations, regional groups or with Nations not Mem
bers of the Commission, for participation in the work of the Commission or its
Committees, or for mutual assistance on problems of controlling foot-and-mouth
disease. These arrangements may include the establishment of, or participation
in, joint committees.
10. To consider and approve the report of the Executive Committee on the
activities of the Commission, the annual accounts and the budget and program
for the ensuing year, for submission to the Council of the Organization through
the Director-General.
Article V
SPECIAL FUNCTIONS
The following shall be the special functions of the Commission :
1. To assist in controlling outbreaks in emergency situations in any manner
considered appropriate by the Commission and the Member or Members con
cerned. For this purpose the Commission or its Executive Committee in con
formity with the provisions of Article XI (5) may use any uncommitted balances
of the Administrative Budget referred to in Article XIII (7) as well as any supple
mentary contributions which may be provided for emergency action under
Article XIII (4).
2. To take suitable action in the following fields :
2.1 Production and/or storage of virus and/or vaccines by or on behalf
of the Commission, for distribution to any Member in case of need.
2.2 Promotion when necessary of the establishment by a Member or
Members of "cordons sanitaires" to prevent the spread of disease.
3. To carry out such further special projects as may be suggested by Mem
bers or by the Executive Committee and approved by the Commission for achiev
ing the purposes of the Commission as set forth in this Constitution.
4. Funds from the surplus of the Administrative Budget may be used for
the purposes stated in paragraphs 2 and 3 of this Article when such action is
approved by the Commission by a two-thirds majority of the votes cast, providing
such majority is more than one half of the membership of the Commission.
Article VI
ORGANIZATION
1. Each Member shall be represented at Sessions of the Commission by a
single delegate who may be accompanied by an alternate and by experts and
advisers. Alternates, experts and advisers may take part in the proceedings of
the Commission but not vote, except in the case of an alternate who is duly
authorized to substitute for the delegate.
2. Each Member shall have one vote. Decisions of the Commission shall
be taken by a majority of the votes cast except as otherwise provided in this
Constitution. A majority of the Members of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum.
3. The Commission shall elect, at the beginning of each regular session,
a Chairman and two Vice-Chairmen from amongst the delegates. These
Officers shall hold office until the beginning of the next regular session, without
prejudice to the right of re-election.
4. The Director-General of the Organization in consultation with the
Chairman of the Commission shall convene a regular session of the Commission
at least once a year. Special sessions may be convened by the Director-General,
in consultation with the Chairman of the Commission, or if so requested by the
Commission in regular sessions or by at least one-third of the Members during
intervals between regular sessions.
Article VII
COMMITTEES
1. The Commission may establish temporary, special or standing committees
to study and report on matters pertaining to the purpose of the Commission.
2. These Committees shall be convened by the Director-General of the
Organization in consultation with the Chairman of the Commission, at such
times and places as are in accordance with the objectives for which they were
established.
3. The Commission shall determine the membership of such committees.
4. Each committee shall elect its own Chairman.
Article VIII
RULES AND REGULATIONS
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Commission shall with
the concurrence of the Director-General of the Organization, draw up its own
Rules of Procedure and Financial Regulations in conformity with the Rules of
Procedure and the Financial Regulations of the Organization.
Article IX
OBSERVERS
1. The Government of any Nation which is not a member of the Commission
may, with the concurrence of the Commission, be represented at any session of
the Commission or its Committees by an observer without the right to vote,
2. Any other international organization having related interests may, with
the concurrence of the Commission, be represented at any sessions of the Com
mission or its Committees by an observer without the right to vote.
Article X
THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
1. An Executive Committee shall be established and shall be composed
of the Chairman and Vice-Chairmen of the Commission and three delegates
of Members selected by the Commission at the beginning of its regular session.
The Chairman of the Commission shall be the Chairman of the Executive
Committee.
2. Members of the Executive Committee shall hold office until the beginning
of the next regular session without prejudice to the right of re-election.
3. If a vacancy occurs in the Executive Committee before the expiration
of the term of appointment, the Committee may request a Member of the Com
mission to appoint a representative to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the
term.
4. The Executive Committee shall meet at least once between any two
successive regular sessions of the Commission.
5. The Secretary of the Commission shall act as Secretary to the Executive
Committee.
Article XI
FUNCTIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
The Executive Committee shall :
1. Make proposals to the Commission concerning policy matters and the
program of activities;
2. Implement the policies and programs approved by the Commission;
3. Submit to the Commission the draft program and Administrative Budget,
and the annual accounts;
4. Prepare the annual report on the activities of the Commission for appro
val by the Commission and transmission to the Director-General of the Or
ganization ;
5. Undertake such other duties as the Commission may delegate to it, in
particular with reference to emergency action under Article V (1).
Article XII
ADMINISTRATION
1. The staff of the Secretariat of the Commission shall be appointed by the
Director-General with the approval of the Executive Committee, and for ad
ministrative purposes shall be responsible to the Director-General. They shall
be appointed under the same terms and conditions as the staff of the Organization.
2. The expenses of the Commission shall be paid out of its administrative
budget except those relating to such staff and facilities which can be made available
by the Organization. The expenses to be borne by the Organization shall
be determined and paid within the limits of an annual budget prepared by
the Director-General and approved by the Conference of the Organization in
accordance with the Rules of Procedure and the Financial Regulations of the
Organization.
3. Expenses incurred by delegates and their alternates, experts and advisers
in attending meetings of the Commission and its committees shall be determined
and paid by their respective governments.
Article XIII
FINANCE
1. Each Member of the Commission undertakes to contribute annually
its share of the administrative budget in accordance with a scale of contributions
to be adopted by a two-thirds majority of the membership of the Commission.
For the first five years after the Constitution has come into force, these contri
butions shall be in accordance with the scale indicated in Appendix I.1 The
budget for the administrative activities of the Commission for the first five
years shall be on the basis of US $ 50,000 annually, to which shall be added any
contribution made by Members in conformity with paragraph 2 below,
2. Contributions to be paid by Members not listed in Appendix I shall be
determined by the Commission. For this purpose the methods used for cal
culating the above-mentioned scale shall apply.
3. Annual contributions provided for under Paragraphs 1 and 2 above
shall be payable before the end of the first month of the financial year to which
they apply. The financial year shall be the same as that of the Organization.
4. Supplementary contributions may be accepted from a Member or Mem
bers or from Organizations or individuals for emergency action or for the purpose
of implementing special schemes or campaigns of control which under Article V
the Commission or Executive Committee may adopt or recommend.
5. All contributions from Members shall be payable in currencies to be
determined by the Commission in agreement with each contributing Member.
6. All contributions received shall be placed in a Trust Fund administered
by the Director-General of the Organization in conformity with the Financial
Regulations of the Organization.
7. At the end of each financial year, any uncommitted balance of the
Administrative Budget shall be placed in a special account to be available for
the purposes outlined in Articles IV and V.
Article XIV
AMENDMENTS
1. This Constitution may be amended by the Commission by a two-thirds
majority of the votes cast, providing such a majority is more than one-half of
the membership of the Commission. Amendments shall become effective only
with the concurrence of the Council of the Organization, and as from the date
of the decision of the Council, provided that any amendment involving new
obligations for Members shall come into force in respect of each Member only
on acceptance of it by that Member.
2. Proposals for the amendment of the Constitution may be made by any
Member of the Commission in a communication addressed to both the Chair
man of the Commission and the Director-General of the Organization. The
Director-General shall immediately inform all Members of the Commission
of all proposals for amendments.
3. No proposal for the amendment of the Constitution shall be included
in the agenda of any session unless notice thereof has been received by the Di
rector-General of the Organization at least 120 days before the opening of the
session.
Article XV
ACCEPTANCE
1. Acceptance of this Constitution shall not be subject to any reservation.
2. Acceptance shall be effected by the deposit of a notification of acceptance
with the Director-General of the Organization and shall take effect as regards
Members of the Organization or the Office, on receipt of such notification by the
Director-General who shall forthwith inform each of the Members of the Com
mission.
3. Membership of Nations that are neither members of the Organization
nor of the Office shall become effective on the date on which the Council approves
the application for membership in conformity with the provisions of Article I.
Article XVI
WITHDRAWAL
1. Any Member may withdraw from the Commission at any time after the
expiration of one year from the date on which its acceptance took effect or from
the date on which the Constitution entered into force, whichever is the later,
by giving written notice of withdrawal to the Director-General of the Organization
who shall forthwith inform all Members of the Commission. The withdrawal
shall become effective one year from the date of receipt of the notification of
withdrawal.
2. Non-payment of two consecutive annual contributions shall be regarded
as implying withdrawal of the defaulting Member from the Commission.
3. Any Member of the Commission withdrawing from the Organization
or the Office, when such withdrawal results in this Nation no longer being a
Member of either of these two Agencies, shall be deemed to have withdrawn
simultaneously from the Commission.
Article XVII
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES
1. If there is any dispute regarding the interpretation or application of this
Constitution, the Member or Members concerned may request the Director-
General of the Organization to appoint a committee to consider the question
in dispute.
2. The Director-General shall thereupon, after consultation with the Mem
bers concerned, appoint a committee of experts which shall include representa
tives of those Members. This committee shall consider the question in dispute,
taking into account all documents and other forms of evidence submitted by the
Members concerned. This committee shall submit a report to the Director-
General of the Organization who shall transmit it to the Members concerned
and to the other Members of the Commission.
3. The Members of the Commission agree that the recommendations of
such a committee, while not binding in character, will become the basis for renew
ed consideration by the Members concerned of the matter out of which the
disagreement arose.
4. The Members concerned shall share equally the expenses of the experts.
Article XVIII
TERMINATION
1. This Constitution shall be terminated by a decision of the Commission
taken by a three-fourths majority of the membership of the Commission. It
shall automatically be terminated should membership, as a result of withdrawals,
comprise fewer than six Nations.
2. On termination of the Constitution all assets of the Commission shall
be liquidated by the Director-General of the Organization and after settlement
of all liabilities the balance shall be distributed proportionally amongst Members
on the basis of the scale of contributions in force at the time. Nations whose
contributions are in arrears for two consecutive years and hence deemed to have
withdrawn in conformity with Article XVI (2) shall not be entitled to a share
of the assets.
Article XIX
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Constitution shall enter into force upon receipt by the Director-
General of the Organization of notifications of acceptance from six Member
Nations of the Organization or of the Office, providing that their contributions
represent in the aggregate not less than 30% of the Administrative Budget
provided for in Article XIII (1).
2. The Director-General shall notify all Nations having deposited notifi
cations of acceptance of the date on which this Constitution comes into force.
3. The text of this Constitution drawn up in the English, French and
Spanish languages, which languages shall be equally authoritative, was approved
by the Conference of the Organization on the eleventh day of December 1953.
4. Two copies of the text of this Constitution shall be authenticated by the
Chairman of the Conference and the Director-General of the Organization,
one copy of which shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations and the other in the archives of the Organization. Additional copies
of this text shall be certified by the Director-General and furnished to all Mem
bers of the Commission with the indication of the date on which the Constitution
has come into force.
APPENDIX I
SCALE OF ANNUAL CONTRIBUTIONS1
Calculated on national income of each country as expressed in the Scale of Contri
butions to the Organization, the relative position of each country in regard to possible
infection with foot-and-mouth disease and the number of livestock to be protected in
each country.
