1955 convention between italy and switzerland concerning the regulation of lake luganosource: the president of the italian republic and the swiss federal council,having regard to the fact that flood waters from lake lugano periodically cause substantial damage in the riparian areas, and desirous of protecting such areas from further flooding so far as possible and of better controlling the level of the lake, have resolved to conclude a convention and have appointed as their plenipotentiariesthe president of the italian republicmr. pietro frosini, president of section of the high council of public works;the swiss federal councilmr. nello celio, councillor of state, head of the department of public works of the canton of ticino,who, having exchanged their full powers, found in good and due form, have agreed on the following provisions: ARTICLE ithe high contracting parties agree to proceed with the regulation of lake lugano in accordance with the plan of september 1951 and the control regulations of august 1953, both submitted by the federal water service at berne ARTICLE ii1. the regulation works shall comprise:(a) correction of the lavena narrows;(b) the control dam at la rocchetta;(c) correction of the tresa between ponte-tresa and madonnone.2. the said works shall be started within two years from the date of entry into force of this convention ARTICLE iii1. the high contracting parties agree to recognize the regulation of lake lugano as a work of public interest. each of the two governments shall thereforeaccord with respect to its own territory the right to expropriate such land as may be necessary for the execution, operation and maintenance of the works and also any rights which may conflict therewith.2. land in the public domain may be occupied and used free of charge so far as may be necessary for the execution, operation and maintenance of the works ARTICLE iv1. subject to the exercise of the powers of the mixed supervisory commission established under article vi of this convention, the canton of ticino shall be responsible for executing the works. the council of state of the said canton shall appoint managerial staff for the works, make arrangements, in consultation with the italian authorities, to publish the plans in accordance with the provisions in force in the two countries, and award contracts.2. the high contracting parties undertake to make every effort to facilitate the execution of the regulation works, in particular by granting the following advantages:(a) the management shall enjoy the support of the competent administrative authorities of both countries(b) personnel employed on the works shall enjoy freedom of movement on the banks of the lavena narrows and of the tresa. such personnel shall, however, remain subject to all necessary measures of police and customs control;(c) the two governments shall exempt materials intended for the execution and maintenance of the works from customs duties, taxes and import and export licensing; such materials shall, however, be declared at the competent customs house on every occasion.exemption shall be granted on production of a certificate issued by the italian ministry of public works for the swiss customs and by the department of public works of the canton of ticino for the italian customs declaring that the material is intended solely for use in the execution and maintenance of the works provided for in this convention ARTICLE vthe total cost of the works referred to in article ii of this convention, which is estimated at 4 million swiss francs, shall be borne wholly by switzerland. italy, for its part, shall bear the total cost of protecting the banks of the tresa in italian territory downstream from the correction provided for in article ii ARTICLE vi1. the two governments shall establish a supervisory commission of six members, three of whom shall be appointed by the government of the italian republic and three by the swiss federal council. each contracting government shall pay the expenses of the members it appoints.2. while the works are u
  953.
