STATUTES
of the
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR GENETIC ENGINEERING AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
PREAMBLE
THE STATES, PARTIES TO THE PRESENT STATUTES
Recognizing the need for developing and applying peaceful uses of genetic
engineering and biotechnology for the benefit of mankind,
Urging that the potential of genetic engineering and biotechnology should
be utilized to contribute to solving the pressing problems of development,
particularly in the developing countries,
Being avare of the need for international co-operation in this field,
particularly in research, development and training,
Emphasizing the urgency of strengthening the scientific and technological
capabilities of developing countries in this field,
Recognizing the important role that an International Centre would play in
the application of genetic engineering and biotechnology for development,
Bearing in mind that the High-Level Meeting  "held on 13-17 December 1982
in Belgrade, Yugoslavia, recommended that an International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology of high excellence be established soonest
possible, and
Recognizing the initiative taken by the Secretariat of UNIDO for the
promotion and the preparation of the establishment of such a Centre,
HAVE AGREJED as follows:
Article 1
Establishment and Seat of the Centre
1. An International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
(hereinafter referred to as  "the Centre ") is hereby established as an
international organization comprising a centre and a network of
affiliated national, sub-regional and regional centres.
2. The Centre shall have its seat at
Article 2
Objectives
The objectives of the Centre shall be:
(a) To promote internacional co-operation in developing and applying peaceful
uses of genetic engineering and b'iotechnology, in particular for
developing countries;
(b) To assist developing countries in strengthening their scientific and
technological capabilities in the field of genetic engineering and
biotechnology;
(c) To stimulate and assist activities at regional and national levels in the
field of genetic engineering and biotechnology;
(d) To develop and promote application of genetic engineering and
biotechnology for solving problems of development, particularly in
developing countries;
(e) To serve as a forum of exchange of information, experience and know-how
among scientists and technologists of Member States;
(f) To utilize the scientific and technological capabilities of. developing
and jJreveloped countries in the field of genetic engineering and
biotechnology; and
(g) To act-as a focal point of a network of affiliated (national,
sub-regional and regional) research and development centres.
Article 3
Functions
Towards Che fulfilment of its objectives, the Centre shall generally take
necessary and appropriate action, and in particular shall:
(a) Carry out research and development including pilot-plant activities in
the field of genetic engineering and biotechnology;
(b) Train at the Centre and arrange the training elsewhere of scientific and
technological personnel, particularly from developing countries;
(c) Provide, upon request, advisory services to Members to develop their
national technological capacity;
(d) Promote interaction between the scientific and technological communities
of the Member States through programmes to enable visits of scientists
and technologists to the Centre, and through programmes of associateship
and other activities;
(e) Convene expert meetings to strengthen the activities of the Centre;
(f) Promote networks of national and international institutions as
appropriate Co facilitate activities such as joint research programmes,
training, testing and sharing of results, pilot-plant activities,
information and material exchange;
(g) Identify and promote without delay the initial network of highly
qualified research -centres to serve as Affiliated Centres, promote
existing national, sub-regional, regional and international networks of
laboratories, including those associated with the organizations mentioned
in Article 15, active in or related to the field of genetic engineering
and biotechnology to serve as Affiliated Networks, as well as promote the
establishment of new highly qualified research centres;
(h) Carry out a programme of bio-informatics to support in particular research
and development and application for the benefit of developing countries;
(i) Collect and disseminate information on fields of activities ot concern to
the Centre and the Affiliated Centres;
(j) Maintain close contacts with industry.
Article 4
Membership
1. Members of the Centre shall be all States that have become parties to
these Statutes in accordance with Article 20 thereof.
2. Founding Members of the Centre shall be all Members that have signed
these Statutes before their entry into force in accordance with
Article 21 thereof.
Article 5
Organs
1. The organs of the Centre shall be:
(a) The Board of Governors,
(b) The Council of Scientific Advisers,
(c) The Secrétariat.
2. Other subsidiary organs may be established by the Board of Governors in
accordance with Article 6.
Article 6
Board of Governors
1. The Board of Governors shall consist of a representative of each Member
of the Centre, and serving in an ex officio capacity without the right to
vote, the Executive Head of UNIDO or his representative. In nominating
their representatives, Members shall pay due regard to their
administrative capability and scientific background.
2. In addition to exercising other functions specified in these Statutes,
the Board shall:
(a) Determine the general policies and principles governing the
activities of the Centre;
(b) Admit the new Members to the Centre;
(c) Approve the work programme and the budget after having taken into
account the recommendations of the Council of Scientific Advisers,
adopt the financial regulations of the Centre and decide on any
other financial matter, particularly the mobilization of resources
for the effective operation of the Centre;
(d) Grant, as a matter of the highest priority, on a case-by-case basis
the status of an Affiliated Centre (national, sub-regional, regional
and international) to research centres of Member States that fulfil
accepted criteria of scientific excellence, and of an Affiliated
Network to national, regional and international laboratories;
(e) Establish, in accordance with Article 14, rules which regulate
patents, licensing, copyrights and other rights to intellectual
property, including the transfer of results emanating from the
research work of the Centre;
(f) Upon recommendation of the Council, take any other appropriate
action to enable the Centre to further its objectives and carry out
its functions.
3. The Board shall hold a regular session once a year, unless it decides
otherwise. Regular sessions shall be held at the seat of the Centre
unless otherwise determined by the Board.
4. The Board shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
5. A majority of the Members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
6.. Each Member of the Board shall have one vote. Decisions shall be made
preferably by consensus, otherwise by a majority of the Members present
and voting, except that decisions on the appointment of the Director,
programmes of work and the budget shall be made by a two-thirds majority
of the Members present and voting.
7. Representatives of the United Nations, the specialized agencies and the
International Atomic Energy Agency, as well as of intergovernmental
organizations and non-governmental organizations may, upon invitation of
the Board, participate as observers in its deliberations. For this
purpose, the Board shall establish a list of organizations that have
relationship with and have expressed interest in the work of the Centre.
8. The Board may establish subsidiary organs on a permanent or ad hoc basis,
as may be necessary for the effective discharge of its functions, and
shall receive reports from such organs.
Article 7
Council of Scientific Advisers
1. The Council shall consist of up to ten scientists and technologists in
the substantive fields of the Centre. A scientist from the host State
shall be a member of the Council. The members of the Council shall be
elected by the Board. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of
electing the members on a balanced geographical basis. The Director
shall serve as Secretary of the Council.
2. Except for the initial election, the members of the Council shall hold
office for a period of three years and be eligible for reappointment for
another period of three years. The terms of the members shall be such
that not more than one-third be elected at one time.
3. The Council shall elect a chairman from among its members.
4. In addition to exercising other functions specified in these Statutes or
delegated to it by the Board, the Council shall:
(a) Examine the draft work programme and the budget of the Centre and
make recommendations to the Board;
(b) Review the implementation of the approved work programme and make an
appropriate report to the Board;
(c) Elaborate on the medium and long-term prospectives of the Centre's
programmes and planning including specialized and new fields of
research and make recommendations to the Board;
(d) Assist the Director on all substantive, scientific and technical
matters concerning the activities of the Centre, including the
co-operation with Affiliated Centres and Networks;
(e) Approve safety regulations for the research work of the Centre;
(f) Advise the Director on the appointment of senior staff (Heads of
Departments and above).
5. The Council may constitute ad hoc panels of scientists from Member States
for the preparation of specialized scientific reports to facilitate its
task of advising and recommending suitable measures to the Board.
6. (a) The Council shall hold a regular session once a year, unless it
decides otherwise;
(b) Sessions shall be held at the seat of the Centre, unless otherwise
determined by the Council.
7. The Heads of Affiliated Centres and one representative for each
Affiliated Network may participate in an observer capacity in the
deliberations of the Council.
8. Senior scientific staff may attend the sessions of the Council, if so
requested.
Article 8
Secretariat
1. The Secretariat shall comprise the Director and the staff.
2. The Director shall be appointed from among candidates of Member States by
the Board after consultation with the Council and shall hold office for a
period of five years. The Director may be re appointed for a further
period of five years after which he shall not be eligible for
reappointment. The Director should be a person of the highest possible
standing and respect in the scientific and technological field of the
Centre. Due regard shall also be given to the experience of the
candidate in the management of a scientific centre and a
muitidisciplinary team of scientists.
3. The staff shall comprise a Deputy Director, Heads of Departments and
other professional, technical, administrative and clerical personnel
including manual workers as the Centre may require.
A. The Director shall be the chief scientific/administrative officer and the
legal representative of the Centre. He shall act in that capacity at all
meetings of the Board and its subsidiary organs. Subject to directives
and control of the Board or the Council, the Director shall have the
overall responsibility and authority to direct the work of the Centre.
He shall perform such other functions as are entrusted to the Director by
these organs. The Director shall be responsible for the appointment,
organization and functioning of the staff. The Director shall establish
a consultation mechanism with senior scientists of the Centre concerning
the evaluation of scientific results and current planning of scientific
work.
5» In the performance of their duties the Director and che staff shall not
seek or receive instructions from any government or from any authority
external to the Centre. They shall refrain from any action that might
reflect on their position as international officials responsible only to
the Centre. Each Member undertakes to respect the exclusively
international character of the responsibilities of the Director and the
staff and not to seek to influence them in the discharge of their
responsibilities.
6. The staff shall be appointed by the Director under regulations approved
by the Board. The conditions of service of staff shall conform as far as
possible to those of the United Nations common system. The paramount
consideration in the employment of the scientific and technical staff and
in determining the conditions of service shall be the necessity of
securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity.
Article 9
Affiliated Centres and Networks
1. In pursuance of paragraph 1 of Article 1, sub-paragraph (g) of Article 2
and sub-paragraph (g) of Article 3. the Centre shall develop and promote
a system of Affiliated Centres and Affiliated Networks to fulfil the
objectives of the Centre.
2. Based on the recommendation of the Council, the Board shall establish the
criteria for granting the status of an Affiliated Centre to research
centres and decide upon the extent of formal relationship of Affiliated
Centres to the organs of the Centre.
3. Based on the recommendation of the Council, the Board shall establish
criteria for granting the status of Affiliated Networks to such national,
regional and international groups of laboratories of Member States which
have special potential for strengthening the activities of the Centre.
4. Upon approval of the Board the Centre shall conclude agreements for
establishing relationship with the Affiliated Centres and Networks.
These agreements may include, but not be limited to, scientific and
financial aspects.
5. The Centre may contribute to the financing of Affiliated Centres and
Networks according to a formula approved by the Board in agreement with
interested Member States.
Article 10
Financial Matters
1. The financing of the Centre shall in general consist of:
(a) Initial contributions for launching the Centre;
(b) Annual contributions by the Members preferably in convertible
currency;
(c) General and special voluntary contributions, including gifts,
bequests, subventions and funds in trust from Members, non-member
states, the United Nations, its specialized agencies, the
International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations Development
Programme, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations,
foundations, institutions and private persons subject to the
approval of the Board;
(d) Any other sources, subject to the approval of the Board.
2. For financial considerations, least developed countries, as defined by
the appropriate resolutions of the United Nations may become Members of
the Centre on the basis of more favourable criteria to be established by
the Board.
3. The Host State shall make an initial contribution by making available to
the Centre the necessary infrastructure (land, buildings, furniture,
equipment, etc.) as well as through a contribution to the operating costs
of the Centre in the initial years of its operation.
4. The Director shall prepare and submit to the Board through the Council a
draft programme of work for the following fiscal period together with the
corresponding financial estimates.
5. The fiscal period of the Centre shall be the calendar year.
Article 11
Assessment and Auditing
1. During the first five years the regular budget of the Centre shall be
based on the amounts pledged annually by each Member for those five
years. After the first five-year period consideration may be given to
the possibility of the Board assessing annual contributions each year for
the following year on the basis of a formula recommended by the
Preparatory Committee which shall take into account the contribution of
each Member to the regular budget of the United Nations, based on its
most recent scale of assessment.
2. States which become Members of the Centre after 31 December may consider
the possibility of a special contribution towards capital expenditure and
current operational costs for the year in which they become Members.
3. Contributions made in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of
this Article shall be applied in reducing the contributions of other
Members unless otherwise decided by the Board by the majority of all
Members.
4. The Board shall appoint auditors to examine the accounts of the Centre.
The auditors shall submit a report on the annual accounts to the Board
through the Council.
5. The Director shall furnish the auditors with such information and
assistance as they may require to carry out their duties.
6. States which have to seek approval of these Statutes by their legislative
authorities for participating in the Centre and have therefore signed the
Statutes ad referendum shall not be obliged to pay a special contribution
as foreseen in paragraph 2 of this Article in order to effect their
participation.
Article 12
Headquarters Agreement
The Centre shall conclude a headquarters agreement with the Host Government.
The provisions of such agreement shall be subject to the approval of the Board
Article 13
Legal Status, Privileges and Immunities
1. The Centre shall have juridical personality. It shall be fully empowered
to discharge its functions and achieve its objectives, including the
following:
(a) To conclude agreements with States or international organizations;
(b) To award contracts;
(c) To acquire and dispose of movable and immovable property;
(d) To initiate legal proceedings.
2. The Centre, its property and assets wherever located shall enjoy immunity
from every form of legal process except in so far as in any particular
case it has expressly waived its immunity. It is, however, understood
that no waiver of immunity shall extend to any measure of execution.
3» All premises of the Centre shall be inviolable. The property and assets
of the Centre wherever located shall be immune from search, requisition,
confiscation, expropriation and any other form of interference, whether
by executive, administrative, judicial or legislative actions.
4. The Centre, its property, assets, income and transactions shall be exempt
from all taxation including customs duties, prohibitions and restrictions
on imports and exports in respect of articles imported or exported by the
Centre for its official use. The Centre-shall also be exempt from any
obligation relating to the payment, withholding or collection of any tax
or duty.
5. Representatives of the Members shall enjoy such privileges and immunities
as are provided for by Article IV of the Convention on Privileges and
Immunities of the United Nations.
6. Officials of the Centre shall enjoy such privileges and immunities as are
provided for by Article V of the Convention on Privileges and Immunities
of the United Nations.
7. Experts of the Centre shall enjoy the same privileges and immunities as
are provided for officials of the Centre in paragraph 6 hereinbefore.
8. All persons undergoing training or taking part in a scheme for the
exchange of personnel at the headquarters of the Centre or organized
elsewhere within the territory of the Members in pursuance of the
provisions of these Statutes shall have the right of entry into sojourn,
or exit as is necessary for the purpose of their training or the exchange
of personnel. They shall be granted facilities for speedy travel and
visas where required shall also be granted promptly and free of charge.
9. The Centre shall co-operate at all times with the appropriate authorities
of the Host State and other Members to facilitate the proper
administration of justice, secure the observance of national laws and
prevent the occurrence of any abuse in connection with privileges,
immunities and facilities mentioned in this Article.
Article 14
Publications and Rights to Intellectual Property
1. The-Centre shall publish all results of its research activities provided
such publication does not contravene its general policy regarding rights
to intellectual property approved by the Board.
2. All rights, including title, copyright and patent rights, relating to any
work produced or developed by the Centre shall be vested in the Centre.
3. It shall be the policy of the Centre to obtain patents or interests in
patents on results of genetic engineering and biotechnology developed
through projects of the Centre.
A. Access to intellectual property rights concerning the results emanating
from the research work of the Centre shall be granted to Members and to
developing countries that are not Members of the Centre in accordance
with applicable international conventions. In formulating rules
regulating access to intellectual property the Board shall not establish
criteria prejudicial to any Member or group of Members.
5. The Centre shall use its patent and other rights, and any financial or
other benefits associated herewith, to promote, for peaceful purposes,
the development, production and wide application of biotechnology,
predominantly in the interest of developing countries.
Article*15
Relations with other Organizations
In undertaking activities and in pursuance of its objectives, the Centre may
with the approval of the Board seek as appropriate co-operation with other
States not parties to these Statutes, the United Nations and its subsidiary
organs, the specialized agencies of the United Nations and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, governmental and non-governmental organizations,
national scientific institutes and societies.
Article 16
Amendments
1. Any Member may propose amendments to the Statutes. Texts of proposed
amendments shall be promptly communicated by the Director to all Members
and shall not be considered by the Board until ninety days- after the
dispatch of such communication.
2. Amendments shall be approved by a two-thirds majority of all Members and
shall enter into force for those Members who have deposited instruments
of ratification.
Article 17
Withdrawal
Any Member may withdraw at any time after five years of membership upon giving
one year's written notice to the Depositary.
Article 18
Liquidation
In case of termination of the Centre the State in which the Centre's
headquarters aré located, shall be responsible for the liquidation, unless
otherwise agreed upon by the Members at the time of termination. Except as
otherwise decided by the Members, any surplus shall be distributed among those
States which are Members of the Centre at the time of the termination in
proportion to all payments made by them from the date of their becoming
Members Of the Centre. In the event of a deficit, this shall be met by the
existing Members in the same proportions as their contributions.
Article 19
Settlement of Disputes
Any dispute involving two or more Members concerning the interpretation or
application of these Statutes, which is not settled through negotiations
between the parties concerned or, if needed, through the good offices of the
Board, shall be submitted, at the request of the disputing parties to any of
the means to a peaceful solution provided in the Charter of the United Nations
within three months from the date on which the Board states that the dispute
cannot be settled through the good offices of the Board.
Article 20
Signature, Ratification, Acceptance and Accession
1. These Statutes shall be open for signature by all States at the Meeting
of Plenipotentiaries held in Madrid on 12-13 September 1983, and
thereafter at United Nations Headquarters in New York until the date of
their entry into force in accordance with Article 21.
2. These Statutes shall be subject to ratification or acceptance by
signatory States. The appropriate instruments shall be deposited with
the Depository.
3. After the entry into force of these Statutes in accordance with
Article 21, States that have not signed the Statutes may accede to them
by depositing instruments of accession with the Depositary after their
request for membership has been approved by the Board.
4. States which have to seek approval of these Statutes by their legislative
authorities may sign on an ad referendum basis until the appropriate
approval has been obtained.
Article 21
Entry into Force
1. These Statutes shall enter into force when at least 24 States, including
Che Host State of the Centre, have deposited instruments of ratification
or acceptance and, after having ascertained among themselves that
sufficient financial resources are ensured, notify the Depositary that
these Statutes shall enter into force.
2. For each State acceding to these Statutes, these Statutes shall enter
into force on the 30th day after deposit by such State of its instrument
of accession.
3. Until the entering into force of the Statutes in accordance with
paragraph 1 hereinbefore, they shall be applied provisionally upon
signature within the limits allowed by national legislation.
Article 22
Depositary
The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall be the Depositary of these
Statutes and shall send the notifications he issues in that capacity to the
Director as well as to the Members.
Article 23
Authentic Texts
These Statutes shall be authentic in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian
and Spanish.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned Plenipotentiaries being duly authorized by
their respective Governments thereto, have signed the present Statutes:
Done at Madrid this thirteenth day of September one thousand nine hundred and
eighty three, in a single original.
