Final Protocol to the Additional Convention Between Switzerland, Baden And Alsace-Lorraine Concerning Fishing In Lake Constance And Its Tributaries (Protocole Final a Convention Additionnelle Concernant La Peche Dans Le Lac De Constance Et Dans Ses Affluents). Source: Martens, Nouveau recueil général de traités et autres acts relatifs aux rapports de droit international, deuxième série, vol. 10, pp. 523. FINAL PROTOCOL. When signing the supplementary agreement to the agreement of March 25, 1875 and July 14, 1877, respectively, on the application of similar provisions for fishing in the Rhine and its tributaries, including Lake Constance, the authorized representatives considered it useful and necessary in the current final protocol to lay down some explanations and explanations: I. It seems desirable that the regulations to be issued by the authorities involved for the implementation of Section 3 of the supplementary agreement should correspond as far as possible and that the authorities involved should act in advance for this purpose. II. The catching of silver trout should initially be completely released, i.e. not linked to controls of any kind (e.g. application of seals) during the closed season, at least insofar as such controls are not also introduced by the other states on the shore of Lake Constance. III. With regard to Section 6 of the supplementary agreement, there is agreement that the catch of so-called scabies (young perch used as bait fish when hunting ducks) can continue to be permitted by the responsible authorities. IV. Even if a specific judgement cannot be formed at the moment on the question of the predominant harmfulness or usefulness of the introduction of fish species into Lake Constance, which are not native to the same, and therefore the agreement on relevant provisions was avoided, it appears It is nevertheless desirable that in future no new species of fish be introduced into the lake without prior notification of the governments of the riparian states and that under no circumstances should such an introduction take place without the approval of the competent authority. V. It is stated that when dates are given in the agreement of March 25, 1875, and July 14, 1877, respectively, and in the supplementary agreement, both the first and the last-mentioned day are to be regarded as included. Done at Colmar, September 21, 1884. COAZ HARDECK BUCHENBERGER v. BIBRA
