AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA FOR THE PROTECTION OF MIGRATORY BIRDS AND THEIR ENVIRONMENT
THE GOVERNMENT OF AUSTRALIA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA (hereinafter referred to as the Contracting Parties):

CONSIDERING that birds constitute an important element in the natural environment and are also important natural resources of great value in carrying on scientific, cultural, artistic, recreational and economic activities;

RECOGNISING the existence of special international concern for the protection of migratory birds;

NOTING the existence of bilateral and multilateral agreements for the protection of migratory birds;

CONSIDERING that many species of birds that are known to be migratory occur in Australia and in the People's Republic of China;

DESIRING to co-operate in the protection of migratory birds and their environment;

HAVE REACHED THE FOLLOWING AGREEMENT as a result of friendly discussions:


Article I
1. In this Agreement, the term "migratory birds" means:

(a) Birds for which there is reliable evidence of migration between the two countries from the recovery of bands or other markers; and

(b) Birds which are jointly determined by the competent authorities of the Contracting Parties to migrate between the two countries on the basis of published reports, photographs and other information.

However, migratory birds known to have been introduced by man to either country shall be excluded.

2. (a) The species recognised as migratory birds in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article are listed in the Annex to this Agreement.

(b) The competent authorities of the Contracting Parties shall, from time to time, review the Annex. If they consider it necessary, the Contracting Parties may amend it by mutual arrangement.

(c) The Annex shall be considered amended ninety days after the date upon which each Party informs the other in a diplomatic note that it accepts the amendments.

Article II
1. Each Contracting Party shall prohibit the taking of migratory birds and their eggs. However, exceptions to that prohibition may be permitted in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in each country in the following cases:

(a) for scientific, educational, propagative or other specific purposes not inconsistent with the objectives of this Agreement;

(b) for the purpose of protecting persons or property;

(c) during hunting seasons established in accordance with paragraph 3 of this Article; and

(d) to allow the hunting and gathering of specified migratory birds or their eggs by the inhabitants of specified regions who have traditionally carried on such activities for their own food, clothing or cultural purposes, provided that the population of each species is maintained in optimum numbers and that adequate preservation of the species is not prejudiced.

2. Each Contracting Party shall prohibit any sale, purchase or exchange of migratory birds or their eggs, whether they are alive or dead, or of the products thereof or their parts, except those taken in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Article.

3. Each Contracting Party may establish seasons for hunting migratory birds taking into account the maintenance of annual reproduction required for the survival of those birds.

Article III
1. Each Contracting Party shall encourage exchanges of data and publications regarding research on migratory birds.

2. The Contracting Parties shall encourage the formulation of joint research programs on migratory birds.

3. Each Contracting Party shall encourage the conservation of migratory birds, especially those species in danger of extinction.

Article IV
Each Contracting Party shall endeavour, in accordance with its laws and regulations in force, to:

(a) establish sanctuaries and other facilities for the management and protection of migratory birds and also of their environment; and

(b) take appropriate measures to preserve and enhance the environment of migratory birds. In particular, each Contracting Party shall:

(i) seek means to prevent damage to migratory birds and their environment, and

(ii) endeavour to take such measures as may be necessary to restrict or prevent the importation and introduction of animals and plants which are hazardous to the preservation of migratory birds and their environment.

Article V
Upon the request of either of the Contracting Parties, the Contracting Parties shall hold consultations regarding the operation of this Agreement.

Article VI
1. This Agreement shall enter into force on the day upon which both Contracting Parties have notified each other that their respective constitutional and other requirements necessary to give effect to this Agreement have been complied with.[1] It shall remain in force for fifteen years and shall continue in force thereafter until terminated in accordance with the provisions in paragraph 2 of this Article.

2. Either Contracting Party may, by giving one year's notice in writing, terminate this Agreement at the end of the initial fifteen year period or at any time thereafter.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized thereto by their respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.

Done in duplicate, at Canberra, on twenty October, 1986 in the English and Chinese languages, both texts being equally authentic.

FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE

AUSTRALIA: PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA:

[Signed:] [Signed:]

S RYAN DONG ZHIYONG

ANNEX


1. Streaked Shearwater Puffinus leucomelas

(Calonectris leucomelas)

2. Sooty Shearwater Puffinus griseus

3. Leach's Storm-Petrel Oceanodroma leucorhoa

4. White-tailed Tropicbird Phaethon lepturus

5. Red-footed Booby Sula sula

6. Brown Booby Sula leucogaster

7. Great Frigatebird Fregata minor

8. Andrew's Frigatebird Fregata andrewsi

9. Least Frigatebird Fregata ariel

10. Cattle Egret Bubulcus ibis

(Ardeola ibis)

11. Great Egret Egretta alba

12. Eastern Reef Egret Egretta sacra

13. Yellow Bittern Ixobrychus sinensis

14. Glossy Ibis Plegadis falcinellus

15. Garganey Anas querquedula

16. Northern Shoveler Anas clypeata

17. White-bellied Sea-Eagle Haliaeetus leucogaster

18. Sarus Crane Grus antigone

19. Red-legged Crake Rallina fasciata

20. Corncrake Crex crex

21. Pheasant-tailed Jacana Hydrophasianus chirurgus

22. Painted Snipe Rostratula benghalensis

23. Grey Plover Pluvialis squatarola

24. Lesser Golden Plover Pluvialis dominica

25. Ringed Plover Charadrius hiaticula

26. Little Ringed Plover Charadrius dubius

27. Mongolian Plover Charadrius mongolus

28. Large Sand-Plover Charadrius leschenaultii

29. Caspian Plover Charadrius asiaticus

30. Little Curlew Numenius borealis

(Numenius minutus)

31. Whimbrel Numenius phaeopus

32. Eurasian Curlew Numenius arquata

33. Eastern Curlew Numenius madagascariensis

34. Black-tailed Godwit Limosa limosa

35. Bar-tailed Godwit Limosa lapponica

36. Redshank Tringa totanus

37. Marsh Sandpiper Tringa stagnatilis

38. Greenshank Tringa nebularia

39. Wood Sandpiper Tringa glareola

40. Common Sandpiper Tringa hypoleucos

41. Grey-tailed Tattler Tringa incana

(Tringa brevipes)

42. Terek Sandpiper Xenus cinereus

(Tringa terek)

43. Ruddy Turnstone Arenaria interpres

44. Asian Dowitcher Limnodromus semipalmatus

45. Latham's Snipe Capella hardwickii

(Gallinago hardwickii)

46. Pin-tailed Snipe Capella stenura

(Gallinago stenura)

47. Swinhoe's Snipe Capella megala

(Gallinago megala)

48. Red Knot Calidris canutus

49. Great Knot Calidris tenuirostris

50. Red-necked Stint Calidris ruficollis

51. Long-toed Stint Calidris subminuta

52. Sharp-tailed Sandpiper Calidris acuminata

53. Dunlin Calidris alpina

54. Curlew Sandpiper Calidris ferruginea

55. Sanderling Crocethia alba

(Calidris alba)

56. Broad-billed Sandpiper Limicola falcinellus

57. Ruff Philomachus pugnax

58. Red-necked Phalarope Phalaropus lobatus

59. Grey Phalarope Phaloropus fulicarius

60. Oriental Pratincole Glareola maldivarum

61. Pomarine Jaeger Stercorarius pomarinus

62. White-winged Tern Chlidonias leucoptera

63. Black Tern Chlidonias niger

64. Caspian Tern Hydropogne tschegrava

(Hydroprogne caspia)

65. Common Tern Sterna hirundo

66. Black-naped Tern Sterna sumatrana

67. Bridled Tern Sterna anaethetus

68. Little Tern Sterna albifrons

69. Lesser Crested Tern Thalasseus bengalensis

(Sterna bengalensis)

70. Common Noddy Anous stolidus

71. Oriental Cuckoo Cuculus saturatus

72. White-throated Needletail Hirundapus caudacutus

73. Fork-tailed Swift Apus pacificus

74. Barn Swallow Hirundo rustica

75. Greater Striated Swallow Hirundo striolata

76. Yellow Wagtail Motacilla flava

77. Yellow-headed Wagtail Motacilla citreola

78. Grey Wagtail Motacilla cinerea

79. White Wagtail Motacilla alba

80. Great Reed-Warbler Acrocephalus arundinaceus

81. Arctic Willow Warbler Phylloscopus borealis
