FOOD ASSISTANCE CONVENTION
PREAMBLE
The Parties to this Convention,
Confirming their continued commitment to the still valid objectives of the
Food Aid Convention, 1999, to contribute to world food security, and to
improve the ability of the international community to respond to emergency
food situations and other food needs of developing countries;
Seeking to improve the effectiveness, efficiency, and quality of food assistance
in preserving the lives and alleviating the suffering of the most vulnerable
populations, especially in emergency situations, by strengthening international
cooperation and coordination, in particular among the Parties and stakeholders;
Recognising that vulnerable populations have particular food and nutritional
needs;
Affirming that States have the primary responsibility for their own national
food security, and therefore for the progressive realisation of the right to
adequate food as set out in the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
Voluntary Guide[ines to support the Progressive Realization of the Right to
Adequate Food in the Context of National Food Security adopted by the FAO
Council in November 2004;
Encouraging governments of food insecure countries to develop and
implement country-owned strategies that address the root causes of food
insecurity through long-term measures, and that ensure proper linkages
between relief, recovery and development activities;
Referring to international humanitarian law and the fundamental humanitarian
principles of humanity, impartiality, neutrality and independence;
Referring to the Principles and Good Practice of Humanitarian Donorship,
endorsed in Stockholm on 17 June 2003;
Recognising that the Parties have their own policies related to providing food
assistance in emergency and non-emergency situations;
Considering the World Food Summit Plan of Action adopted in Rome in 1996,
as well as the Five Rome Principles for Sustainable Global Food Security
identified in the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security of 2009, in
particular the commitment to achieve food security in all countries and the
ongoing effort to reduce poverty and eradicate hunger that was reaffirmed by
the United Nations General Assembly in the United Nations Millennium
Declaration;
Considering the commitments made by donor and recipient countries to
improve development aid effectiveness by applying the principles of the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development's (OECD) Paris
Declaration on Aid Effectiveness adopted in 2005;
Determined to act in accordance with their World Trade Organization (WTO)
obligations, in particular any WTO disciplines on food aid;
Have agreed as follows:
ARTICLE 1
OBJECTIVES
The objectives of this Convention are to save lives, reduce hunger,
improve food security, and improve the nutritional status of the most
vulnerable populations by:
(a) addressing the food and nutritional needs of the most vulnerable
populations through commitments made by the Parties to provide
food assistance that improves access to, and consumption of,
adequate, safe and nutritious food;
(b) ensuring that food assistance provided to the most vulnerable
populations is appropriate, timely, effective, efficient, and based
on needs and shared principles; and
( c) facilitating information-sharing, cooperation, and coordination,
and providing a forum for discussion in order to improve the
effective, efficient, and coherent use of the Parties' resources to
respond to needs.
-2-
ARTICLE 2
PRINCIPLES OF F OOD ASSISTANCE
The Parties, in providing and delivering food assistance to the most
vulnerable populations, should always adhere to the following principles:
(a) General principles of food assistance:
(i) provide food assistance only when it is the most effective
and appropriate means of addressing the food or nutrition
needs of the most vulnerable populations;
(ii) provide food assistance, taking into account the long-term
rehabilitation and development objectives of the recipient
countries, while supporting the broader goal of achieving
food security, whenever appropriate;
(iii) provide food assistance in a manner that protects
livelihoods and strengthens the self-reliance and resilience
of vulnerable populations, and local communities, and that
prevents, prepares for, mitigates and responds to food
security crises;
(iv) provide food assistance in such a way as to avoid
dependency and minimise direct and indirect negative
impacts on beneficiaries and others;
(v) provide food assistance in a way that does not adversely
affect local production, market conditions, marketing
structures and commercial trade or the price of essential
goods for vulnerable populations;
(vi) provide food aid in fully grant form, whenever possible;
(b) Principles of food assistance effectiveness:
(i) in order to increase the amount available to spend on food
assistance for vulnerable populations and to promote
efficiency, minimise associated costs as much as possible;
(ii) actively seek to cooperate, coordinate and share
information to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of
food assistance programs, and the coherence between food
assistance and related policy areas and instruments;
-3-
(iii) purchase food and other components of food assistance
locally or regionally, whenever possible and appropriate;
(iv) increasingly provide untied cash-based food assistance,
whenever possible and based on needs;
(v) only monetise food aid where there is an identified need to
do so, and to improve the food security of vulnerable
populations; base monetisation on transparent and objective
market analysis and avoid commercial displacement;
(vi) ensure food assistance is not used to promote the market
development objectives of the Parties;
(vii) avoid re-exportation of food aid to the maximum extent
possible except to prevent or respond to an emergency
situation; only re-export food aid in a manner that avoids
commercial displacement;
(viii) acknowledge, where appropriate, that relevant authorities
or relevant stakeholders have the primary role and
responsibility for the organisation, coordination and
implementation of food assistance operations;
( c) Principles on the provision of food assistance:
(i) target food assistance according to the food and nutrition
needs of the most vulnerable populations;
(ii) involve beneficiaries in the assessment of their needs and
in the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation
of food assistance, as well as other relevant stakeholders,
where appropriate;
(iii) provide food assistance that meets applicable safety and
quality standards, and that respects cultural and local
dietary habits and the nutritional needs of the beneficiaries;
(iv) uphold the dignity of beneficiaries of food assistance;
-4-
( d) Principles of food assistance accountability:
(i) take specific and appropriate measures to strengthen the
accountability and transparency of food assistance policies,
programs, and operations;
(ii) monitor, evaluate, and communicate, on a regular and
transparent basis, the outcomes and the impact of food
assistance activities in order to further develop best
practices and maximise their effectiveness.
ARTICLE 3
RELATIONSHIP WITH WTO AGREEMENTS
Nothing in this Convention shall derogate from any existing or future
WTO obligations applicable between Parties. In case of conflict between such
obligations and this Convention, the former shall prevail. Nothing in this
Convention will prejudice the positions that a Party may adopt in any
negotiations in the WTO.
ARTICLE 4
ELIGIBLE COUNTRY, ELIGIBLE VULNERABLE POPULATIONS,
ELIGIBLE PRODUCTS, ELIGIBLE ACTIVITIES,
AND ASSOCIATED COSTS
1.    \"Eligible Country   \" means any country on the OECD's Development
Assistance Committee (DAC) list of Official Development Assistance
Recipients, or any other country identified in the Rules of Procedure and
Implementation.
2.    \"Eligible Vulnerable Populations   \" means vulnerable populations in any
Eligible Country.
3.    \"Eligible Products   \" .means products for human consumption that comply
with relevant national policies and legislation of the country of operation,
including, as appropriate, applicable international food safety and quality
standards as well as products that contribute to meeting food needs and
protecting livelihoods in emergency and early recovery situations. The list of
Eligible Products is provided in the Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
-5-
4. Eligible Activities for the fulfilment of a Party's mm1mum annual
commitment in accordance with Article 5 shall be consistent with Article 1,
and shall include at least the following activities:
(a) the provision and distribution of Eligible Products;
(b) the provision of cash and vouchers; and
( c) nutritional interventions.
These Eligible Activities are further elaborated in the Rules of Procedure and
Implementation.
5. Associated Costs eligible for the fulfilment of a Party's minimum annual
commitment according to Article 5 shall be consistent with Article 1, and shall
be limited to costs directly linked to the provision of Eligible Activities, as
further elaborated in the Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
ARTICLE 5
COMMITMENT
1. To meet the objectives of this Convention, each Party agrees to make an
annual commitment of food assistance, set in accordance with its laws and
regulations. Each Party's commitment is referred to as its    \"minimum annual
commitment   \".
2. The minimum annual commitment shall be expressed in terms of value
or quantity as further elaborated in the Rules of Procedure and
Implementation. A Party may choose to express either a minimum value or a
minimum quantity, or a combination of both for its commitment.
3. Minimum annual commitments in terms of value can be expressed in the
currency chosen by the Party. Minimum annual commitments in terms of
quantity can be expressed in tonnes of grain equivalent or other units of
measure provided under the Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
4. Each Party shall notify the Secretariat of its initial minimum annual
commitment as soon as possible and no later than six months following the
entry into force of this Convention, or within three months of its accession to
this Convention.
-6-
5. Each Party shall notify the Secretariat of any change to its minimum
annual commitment for subsequent years no later than the fifteenth day of
December of the year preceding the change.
6. The Secretariat shall communicate the updated mm1mum annual
commitments to all of the Parties as soon as possible and no later than the first
day of January of each year.
7. Contributions made to meet minimum annual commitments should be
made in fully grant form whenever possible. With respect to food assistance
counted towards a Party's commitment, not less than 80 per cent provided to
Eligible Countries and Eligible Vulnerable Populations, as further elaborated
in the Rules of Procedure and Implementation, shall be in fully grant form. To
the extent possible, the Parties shall seek progressively to exceed this
percentage. Contributions that are not made in fully grant form should be
accounted for in each Party's annual report.
8. The Parties shall undertake to conduct all food assistance transactions
under this Convention in such a way as to avoid harmful interference with
normal patterns of production and international commercial trade.
9. The Parties shall ensure that the provision of food assistance is not tied
directly or indirectly, formally or informally, explicitly or implicitly, to
commercial exports of agricultural products or other goods and services to
recipient countries.
10. To meet its minimum annual commitment, whether expressed in value
or quantity, a Party shall make contributions that are consistent with this
Convention and that consist of funding for Eligible Products and Activities,
and Associated Costs, as set forth in Article 4, and as further elaborated in the
Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
11. Contributions provided to meet the minimum annual commitment under
this Convention may only be directed at Eligible Countries or Eligible
Vulnerable Populations, as set forth in Article 4 and as further elaborated in the
Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
12. The Parties' contributions may be provided bilaterally, through
intergovernmental or other international organisations, or through other food
assistance partners, but not through other Parties.
-7-
13. Each Party shall make every effort to meet its mm1mum annual
commitment. If a Party is unable to meet its minimum annual commitment for
a particular year, it shall describe the circumstances of its failure to do so in its
annual report for that year. The unfulfilled amount shall be added to the Party's
minimum annual commitment for the following year unless the Committee
established under Article 7 decides otherwise, or unless extraordinary
circumstances justify not doing so.
14. If a Party's contribution exceeds its minimum annual commitment, the
amount of the excess, but not more than five per cent of its minimum annual
commitment, may be counted as part of the Party's contribution for the
following year.
ARTICLE 6
ANNUAL REPORTING AND INFORMATION SHARING
1. Within ninety days after the end of the calendar year, each Party shall
provide an annual report, in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and
Implementation, to the Secretariat, detailing how it met its minimum annual
commitment under this Convention.
2. This annual report shall contain a narrative component that may include
information on how the Party's food assistance policies, programs and
operations contribute to the objectives and principles of this Convention.
3. The Parties should, on an ongoing basis, exchange information on their
food assistance policies and programs and the results of their evaluations of
these policies and programs.
ARTICLE 7
FOOD ASSISTANCE COMMITTEE
1. A Food Assistance Committee (the    \"Committee   \"), consisting of all of
the Parties to this Convention, is hereby established.
2. The Committee shall make the decisions at its formal sessions and
perform the functions that are required to carry out the provisions of this
Convention in accordance with the principles and objectives of the Convention.
-8-
3. The Committee shall adopt rules governing its proceedings; it may also
adopt rules elaborating further the provisions of this Convention to ensure that
they are properly implemented. Document FAC(l l/12) 1 - 25 April 2012 of the
Food Aid Committee of the Food Aid Convention, 1999 shall serve as the
initial Rules of Procedure and Implementation for this Convention. The
Committee may subsequently decide to modify those Rules of Procedure and
Implementation.
4. The Committee shall make decisions by consensus, meaning that no
Party formally opposes the proposed decision of the Committee on a matter
under discussion at a formal session. Formal opposition may occur either at the
formal session or within thirty days after the circulation of the minutes of a
formal session recording the proposed decisions concerned.
5. For each year, the Secretariat shall prepare a summary report for the
Committee, to be drafted, adopted and published, in accordance with the Rules
of Procedure and Implementation.
6. The Committee should provide a forum for discussion among the Parties
with respect to food assistance matters, such as the need to mobilise
appropriate and timely resource commitments to address the food and
nutritional needs, especially in specific emergency and crisis situations. It
should facilitate information-sharing with and dissemination to other
stakeholders, and should consult with and receive information from them to
support its discussions.
7. Each Party shall designate a representative to receive notices and other
communications from the Secretariat.
ARTICLE 8
CHAIRPERSON AND VICE-CHAIRPERSON
OF THE COMMITTEE
1. At the last formal session held in each year, the Committee shall decide
on a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson for the following year.
2. The Chairperson shall have the following duties:
(a) to approve the draft agenda for each formal session or informal
meeting;
(b) to preside at formal sessions or informal meetings;
-9-
( c) to open and close each formal session or informal meeting;
( d) to submit the draft agenda to the Committee for adoption at the
beginning of each formal session or informal meeting;
( e) to direct discussions and ensure that the procedures specified in
the Rules of Procedure and Implementation are observed;
(f) to invite the Parties to speak;
(g) to rule on points of order in accordance with the relevant Rules of
Procedure and Implementation; and
(h) to ask questions and announce decisions.
3. If the Chairperson is absent from all or part of a formal session or an
informal meeting, or is temporarily unable to fill the office of Chairperson, the
Vice-Chairperson shall act as Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson
and the Vice-Chairperson, the Committee shall appoint a temporary
Chairperson.
4. If, for any reason, the Chairperson is unable to continue to fill the office
of Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall become Chairperson until the end
of the year.
ARTICLE 9
FORMAL SESSIONS AND INFORMAL MEETINGS
1. The Committee shall hold formal sessions and informal meetings
accordi_ng to the Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
2. The Committee shall hold at least one formal session a year.
3. The Committee shall hold additional formal sessions and informal
meetings at the request of the Chairperson or at the request of at least three of
the Parties.
4. The Committee may invite observers and relevant stakeholders who
wish to discuss particular food assistance related matters to attend its formal
sessions or informal meetings in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and
Implementation.
- 10-
5. The Committee shall meet at a location determined in accordance with
the Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
6. The agenda for formal sessions and informal meetings shall be
developed in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and Implementation.
7. The minutes of a formal session, which shall include any proposed
decisions of the Committee, shall be circulated within thirty days after the
formal session.
ARTICLE 10
SECRETARIAT
1. The Committee shall designate a Secretariat and request its services, in
accordance with the Rules of Procedure and Implementation. The Committee
shall request of the.International Grains Council (IGC) that its Secretariat act
as the initial Secretariat of the Committee.
2. The Secretariat shall perform the duties that are set out in this
Convention and the Rules of Procedure and Implementation, perform any
administrative duties, including the processing and distribution of documents
and reports, and carry out other functions identified by the Committee.
ARTICLE 11
RESOLUTION OF DISPUTES
The Committee shall seek to resolve any dispute among the Parties
concerning the interpretation or implementation of this Convention or the
Rules of Procedure and Implementation, including any claim of failure to
perform the obligations set out in this Convention.
ARTICLE 12
SIGNATURE AND RATIFICATION, ACCEPTANCE,
OR APPROVAL
This Convention shall be open for signature by Argentina, Australia, the
Republic of Austria, the Kingdom of Belgium, the Republic of Bulgaria,
Canada, the Republic of Croatia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
the Kingdom of Denmark, the European Union, the Republic of Estonia, the
Republic of Finland, the French Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany,
the Hellenic Republic, Hungary, Ireland, the Italian Republic, Japan, the
-11 -
Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Grand Duchy of
Luxembourg, the Republic of Malta, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the
Kingdom of Norway, the Republic of Poland, the Portuguese Republic,
Romania, the Slovak Republic, the Republic of Slovenia, the Kingdom of
Spain, the Kingdom of Sweden, the Swiss Confederation, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States of America, at
United Nations Headquarters in New York from 11 June 2012 until
31 December 2012. This Convention shall be subject to ratification, acceptance
or approval by each Signatory. Instruments of ratification, acceptance or
approval shall be deposited with the Depositary.
ARTICLE 13
ACCESSION
1. Any State listed in Article 12 that has not signed this Convention by the
end of the signature period, or the European Union if it has not signed by that
time, may accede to it at any time after that period. Instruments of accession
shall be deposited with the Depositary.
2. Once this Convention has entered into force in accordance with
Article 15, it shall be open for accession by any State other than those referred
to in Article 12 or by a Separate Customs Territory possessing full autonomy in
the conduct of its external commercial relations that is deemed eligible by a
decision of the Committee. Instruments of accession shall be deposited with
the Depositary.
ARTICLE 14
NOTIFICATION OF PROVISIONAL APPLICATION
Any State referred to in Article 12, or the European Union, that intends
to ratify, accept, or approve this Convention or accede thereto, or any State or
Separate Customs Territory deemed eligible under Article 13(2) for accession
by a decision of the Committee but has not yet deposited its instrument, may at
any time deposit a notification of provisional application of this Convention
with the Depositary. The Convention shall apply provisionally for that State,
Separate Customs Territory, or the European Union from the date of deposit of
its notification.
- 12-
ARTICLE 15
ENTRY INTO FORCE
1. This Convention shall enter into force on 1 January 2013 if by
30 November 2012 five Signatories have deposited instruments of ratification,
acceptance, or approval.
2. If this Convention does not enter into force in accordance with
paragraph 1, the Signatories to this Convention that have deposited instruments
of ratification, acceptance, or approval and States or the European Union that
have deposited instruments of accession pursuant to Article 13( 1) may decide
by unanimous consent that it shall enter into force among themselves.
3. For any State or Separate Customs Territory, or the European Union, that
ratifies, accepts, approves, or accedes to the Convention after the Convention
enters into force, this Convention shall enter into force on the date of the deposit
of its instrument of ratification, approval, acceptance, or accession.
ARTICLE 16
ASSESSMENT AND AMENDMENT PROCEDURE
1. At any time after the entry into force of this Convention, a Party may
propose an assessment of the relevance of this Convention or propose
amendments to it. Any proposed amendments shall be circulated by the
Secretariat to all of the Parties at least six months in advance and discussed at
the next formal session of the Committee following the end of the notice period.
2. Proposals for amendment to this Convention shall be adopted by decision
of the Committee. The Secretariat shall communicate to all of the Parties, and to
the Depositary, any proposals for amendment adopted by the Committee. The
Depositary shall circulate any adopted amendment to all Parties.
3. Notification of acceptance of an amendment shall be sent to the
Depositary. An adopted amendment shall enter into force for those Parties
having sent that notification, ninety days after the date on which the
Depositary has received such notifications from not less than four fifths of the
number of Parties to this Convention on the date of adoption of the proposed
amendment by the Committee. Such an amendment shall enter into force for
any other Party ninety days after that Party deposits its notification with the
Depositary. The Committee may decide that a different threshold be used for
the number of notifications required to trigger the entry into force of a specific
amendment. The Secretariat shall communicate such a decision to all Parties
and the Depositary.
- 13 -
ARTICLE 17
WITHDRAWAL AND TERMINATION
1. Any Party may withdraw from this Convention at the end of any year by
giving written notice of withdrawal to the Depositary and the Committee at
least ninety days prior to the end of that year. That Party shall not be released
from its minimum annual commitment or reporting obligations incurred under
this Convention, while it was a Party, that have not been discharged by the end
of that year.
2. At any time after the entry into force of this Convention, a Party may
propose the termination of this Convention. Such a proposal shall be
communicated in writing to the Secretariat and shall be circulated by it to all
of the Parties at least six months in advance of its consideration by the
Committee.
ARTICLE 18
DEPOSITARY
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations is designated as the
Depositary of this Convention.
2. The Depositary shall receive notice of any signature, ratification,
acceptance, approval, notification of provisional application of, and accession
to, this Convention, and notify all Parties and Signatories of these notices.
ARTICLE 19
AUTHENTIC TEXTS
The originals of this Convention, of which the English and French texts
are equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
IN WITNESS THEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorised, have signed
this Convention.
DONE at London, 25 April 2012.
