Convention Between the Government of the Republic of Turkey
and the Government of the Republic of Kazakhistan
Concerning the Collaboration in the Animal Health Area
The Government of the Republic of Turkey and the Government of the
Republic of Kazakhistan referred to as the "Contracting Parties",
In order to extent the collaboration in the area of animal health,
to ensure an adequate health condition of the animals in their countries and
to reduce the risk of inecto-contagious and parasitic diseases, wishing to
continue and develop the relationship, friendship and collaboration between
the two States, have decided upon the following:
ARTICLE I
The Contracting Parties will collaborate for the protection of their
national territories against the introduction of spizootic diseases as a result
of imports, exports and transit of live animals, raw materials of animal origin
and products as well as by means of objects which may be pathogen vectors.
ARTICLE II
The competent Ministries of the Contracting Parties will draw up joint
protocol with the purpose of establishing the veterinary import, export and
transit requirements for live animals products and other goods submitted for
control by the border veterinary authorities.
ARTICLE III
The Contracting Parties determine the Veterinary Certificates used
for exportation of live animals and animal products. Authorized official
veterinarians are responsible for providing Veterinary Health Certificate for
import/export at borders.
ARTICLE IV
The Contracting Parties will draw up joint protocol for health requirements
of breeding and slaughter of alive animals in trade.
ARTICLE V
When required Contracting Parties have to give information to 
each other immediately about any animal disease occured in their country.
ARTICLE VI
1. The Veterinary Services of the two countries will have the following
obligations:
a) To inform each other immediately about the epizootics which are
developing on their territories, about species, number of diseased animals,
the place where the disease has been reported, diagnosis, and in the case
of foot-and-mouth disease, about the type of virus detected and about the
measures which have been taken to control the respective diseases.
b) To exchange monthly official veterinary bulletins indicating the statistics
of the infecto contagious diseases of animals at "A" by the International Office
of Epizootics.
2. If, on the territory of one of the Contracting Parties, one of the
epizootics mentioned at item 1.a is reported, this party will provide
the other Contracting Party with the respective pathogenic strains.
3. The Veterinary Service of the Contracting Parties will inform each other on the protection
measures taken, in order to avoid the introduction of the epizootics named at item 1.a in case
these epizootics have been reported in a neighbouring state.
ARTICLE VII
The Parties undertake to ban the export except from to the territory of the other
Party of live animals, animal products and products of animal origin which may spread
the diseases referred in the protocol drawn up in conformity with Article 4.
ARTICLE VIII
The competent authorities of the Parties shall perform all qualitative inspections
of the animal products and products of animal origin to be exported
to one of the Parties, and in particular the inspection to detect hormones, drugs,
pesticides, toxins or any other agents which are detrimental to public health, considering
the tolerance levels which shall be set in accordance with the provisions referred to under
Article 1.
ARTICLE IX
The Contracting Parties will stimulate the collaboration in the area
of applied veterinary research and of the veterinary activity by:
a) Exchange of experience and knowledge in professional training,
b) Collaboration between specialized institutes and central veterinary units,
c) Exchange of information and visits of specialists and research workers, in accordance with article 11,
d) Exchange of journals and other publications of applied veterinary medicine,
e) Exchange of information on the organization of the veterinary activity and on the legal provisions and
instructions published in this area
ARTICLE X
The Veterinary Services of the Contracting Parties will establish
direct contacts in all problems related to the animal health, in accordance with the convention.
ARITCLE XI
The costs that emerge from the fulfillment of the convention will be covered as follows:
a) The exchange of information of Veterinary journals and publications will be
financed by the sending country;
b) In case one of the Parties makes a request for specialists or research workers, all the
expenses will be covered by the applicant.
In case of seminars or other scientific reunions, the travel expenses will be covered
by the sending party, while lodging allowance will be covered by the receiving country.
c) The travel costs for the fulfillment of the provisions in Article 9, item c
are covered by the sending country, while lodging and allowance by the receiving country,
When the convention takes its final form, measures will be taken that
the reciprocity is ensured as far as the payment which are necessary for the application
of Article 9 are concerned.
ARTICLE XII
Disagreements between the Contracting Parties related to the application
of the present convention will be examined by a joint commision;
This commission will have three representatives of each Contracting Party.
The Commission will meet within 30 days after the application convocation
by one of the Parties in its territory and will work in meetings chaired alternatively
by a member of each delegation.
Problems left unsolved by the commission will be negotiated diplomatically.
ARTICLE XIII
This Agreement shall not affect present or future rights or obligations
of the Parties pursuant to other international agreements and treaties.
ARTICLE XIV
The present convention will be submitted for approval in accordance
with the constitutional provisions of each Contracting Party and will become
valid within 60 days after last communication notifying the fulfillment of
the procedures for the validation of the convention.
ARTICLE XV
The provision of this Agreement may be supplemented and/or amended
with the consent of both parties.
This Convention shall remain in force on undetermined time and expires
after six months from the day on which one of the Contracting Parties give the other
Contracting Party notice cancellation.
Concluded in Almati 15.08.1995 in two original copies in English and Turkish
For the Government of the Republic of Turkey
Veysel Atasoy
For the Government of the Republic of Kazakhistan
Janibek Karibjanov
