WILDFIRE PROTECTION AGREEMENT BEETWEEN THE DEPARTEMENT OF THE
INTERIOR AND THE DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE OF THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA AND THE SECRETARIAT OF ENV IRONMENT, NATURAL RESOURCES, AND
FISHERIES OF THE UNITED MEXICAN STATES FOR THE COMMON BORDER
The Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture of the United States of America, on the one
hand, and the Secretariat of Environment,, Natural Resources, and Fisheries of the United Mexican States, on
the other hand (hereinafter referred to as the Parties);
CONSIDERING that many of the land areas along the approximately 3,200 kilometer (2,OO0 miles) United
States-Mexico border are located such that wildfires in one country may become a threat to the resources of
the other country; and
RECOGNIZING that it is desirable and in the public interest to provide for coordinated action between both
countries to facilitate effective use of wildfire protection resources to suppress wildfires on both sides of the
border;
HEREBY AGREE AS FOLLOWS:
ARTICLE I
Purpose
The purpose of this Agreement is to enable wildfire protection resources originating in the territory of. one
country to cross the United States-Mexico border in order to suppress wildfires on the other side of the border
within the zone of mutual assistance in appropriate circumstances.
The purpose of this Agreement is further to give authority for Parties to cooperate an other fire management
activities outside the zone of mutual assistance
ARTICLE II
Definitions
For the purposes of this agreement:
1.  "Wildfire " means a fire that occurs in a  "wildland " area, such as a range or forest, in which
development is essentially non-existent except for roads, railroads, power lines, and similar transportation
facilities, and structures, which if these exist, are widely scattered and are used primarily for recreation or
agricultural purposes.
2. "Wildfire protection resources " means personnel, supplies, equipment aircraft, vehicles, vessels,
radios and specialized machinery or other resources, whether owned or contracted, thatareintended for
wildfire suppression or the transport ofwildfire suppression equipment or personnel.3. "Zone of mutual
assistance " means the area of up to 16kilometers (10 miles) on each side of the United
States-Mexicoborder.4. "Receiving Party' means the Party receiving wildfireprotection resources.5. "Sending
Party " means the party furnishing wildfireprotection resources.
ARTICLE III
Obligations
1. Each. Party shall immediately consider the request of the other Party, whether a Receiving Party or a
sending Party, for cross-border movement of wildfire protection resources within the zone of mutual
assistance, and, to the fullest extent practicable, -promptly approve such request.
2. The Parties shall ensure that annual operating plans are generated in accordance with Article VII.
3. Each Party may obtain, as appropriate, the participation of its state, regional, local,, private or tribal
fire organizations in the implementation of this Agreement, subject to its national laws and regulations.
ARTICLE IV
Reimbursement
Each Party shall assume all of its costs and expenses of furnishing wildland fire protection resources,
including costs for lost or damaged wildfire protection resources, according to t the performance of this
Agreement, unless otherwise agreed by the Parties.
ARTICLE V
Cross-Waiver of claims
1. Each Party hereby waives its claims against the other Party for compensation for loss, damage,
personal injury, or death occurring as a consequence of the performance of this Agreement.
2. Each Party shall, by contract Or otherwise, extend the cross-waiver of liability set forth in paragraph I
above to any contractors or subcontractors or agents or any state, regional, local, private or tribal fire
organizations it may designate or assign to perform activities under-this Agreement.
3. The cross-waiver of 'liability set forth in paragraph I above shall not apply to:
(a) Claims between a Party and its agencies, employees, contractors, subcontractors or agents;
(b) Claims arising from willful misconduct; and
(c) Claims arising from criminal conduct.
ARTICLE VI
Entry of Personnel and Equipment
The Parties are committed to work together, with the involved agencies of their respective governments, to
process appropriate legal documentation, within the applicable laws and regulations of both countries, and to
otherwise facilitate entry to and exit from its territory of all personnel engaged in wildfire-protection pursuant
to this Agreement. Also, each Party shall undertake all reasonable steps and use its best efforts, within
applicable laws and regulations of both countries, to facilitate the admission of all supplies, equipment,
aircraft, vehicles, specialized machinery, or other equipment whether owned or contracted, that are-used or
intended for use in wildfire .suppression or transport of wildfire suppression equipment, or personnel pursuant
to this Agreement without entry fees and without payment of any duties or taxes imposed by reason of
importation.
ARTICLE VII
Annual Operating Plans
1. Annual Operating Plans shall be concluded and executed
between the Parties.
2. Each Annual Operating Plan shall:
(a) identify designated points of contact responsible for fire suppression within the applicable
subregion within the zone of mutual assistance.
(b) Set forth specific criteria for approving requests for
wildfire protection resources;
(c) Develop plans for mobilization Of wildfire protection
resources on each side of the United States-Mexico border;
(d) Establish procedures for efficient and timely
communication of relevant information between designated
points of contact;
(e) Provide for complete and timely reporting and recordkeeping of all wildfire suppression incidents
occurring in the subregion within the zone of mutual assistance;
(f) Identify the necessary procedures and legal documentation, which are to be completed, with
agencies of the governments, for the expeditious cross-border movement of wildfire protection
resources;
(g) Specify the conditions and procedures for the reimbursement, as deemed appropriate, of the
Sending Party for the furnishing of wildfire protection resources; and
(h) Include terms consistent with Article V, a cross waiver for compensation for loss, damage,
personal injury, or death occurring in consequence of the performance of this Agreement.
3. The Parties may recommend the development of operating plans for other fire management activities
outside the zone of mutual assistance, subject to the approval of their respective governments.
4. The Parties shall maintain on file copies of all Annual Operating Plans.
ARTICLE VIII
Status of Personnel
1. Any service performed in furtherance of this Agreement by an employee of a Party shall constitute
service performed on behalf of that Party.
2. The performance of a service under this Agreement by any employee, contractor, subcontractor or
agent of one Party shall in no case render such person an employee, contractor, subcontractor or agent of the
other Party.
ARTICLE IX
Legal Considerations and Relationship to Other Agreements
1. Activities under this Agreement shall be subject to the applicable laws, regulations, and policies of
each Party and subject to the availability of funds.
2. This Agreement is without prejudice to rights and obligations of the Parties under existing bilateral
and multilateral agreements.
ARTICLE X
Dispute Settlement
Any differences that arise in the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement or any
Annual Operating Plan negotiated pursuant hereto, shall be resolved by the Parties by means of negotiations
and consultations.
ARTICLE XI:
Final Provisions
1. This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature by the Parties and shall remain in force for five
years.
2. This Agreement may only be amended or extended by mutual, written agreement of the Parties, and
such agreement shall specify the date upon which such amendments shall take effect.
3. This Agreement may be terminated at any time by either Party upon six months written notice to the
other Party
4. The termination of this Agreement shall not affect the implementation of any fire suppression effort
being carried out under this Agreement at the time when it was in force.
Signed in Mexico City, this fourth day of June, 1999, in three originals, in the English and Spanish
languages, all texts being equally authentic.
