EMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
ON THE CONSERVATION OF HIGH ANDEAN FLAMINGOS
AND THEIR HABITATS
(November 2008)
The Secretariat of Environment and Conservation of Biodiversity of the Republic of
Argentina,
The Vice Ministry of Biodiversity, of the Republic of Bolivia,
Directorate for Environmental, Antarctic and Maritime Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs of Chile,
The National Institute for Natural Resources of the Republic of Peru,
Conscious that the populations of high Andean flamingos have been subject to a
drastic reduction and fragmentation of their habitats and are given a poor state of
conservation;
Aware that, according to IUCN, the global conservation status of Phoenicoparrus
andinus is \"Vulnerable\" and that of Phoenicoparrus jamesi is \"Near Threatened\";
Noting also that the species P. andinus and P. jamesi have been included on Appendix
I of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (CMS) in
order to consider them endangered [I prefer the original!]and, consequently, that CMS Parties,
that are Range States of these migratory species are required to take steps for their protection
pursuant to Article III of the Convention;
Recognizing that the high Andean flamingos undertake continuous migrations among
the wetlands of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Peru to forage, roost and reproduce, and that
they depend on the conservation and integrity of those habitats;
Emphasizing that the major threats that cause the population reduction of the above
mentioned species are among others the fragility of the high Andean wetlands and the impact
caused by human activities such as fresh water contamination caused by the mining industry,
the overexploitation of ground water, water treatment projects, the modification of natural
river courses for agricultural purposes, unregulated tourism, the extraction of eggs and
destruction of colonies as well as inadequate management of grazing on the flood plains of
the high Andean steppes ; and
Acknowledging that, on a regional scale, the Range States, in form of the Conservation
Group for High Andean Flamingos (GCFA), are taking efforts through governmental
organisations, which are responsible for the administration of the national system of protected
areas and the conservation and sustainable use of the wild species in order to ensure these
species' conservation, coordinated and concerted actions across the migratory range of these
2
species are still required to prevent the last populations of these birds from disappearing and
to improve their conservation status;
Adding authority to the role that the Memorandum of Understanding plays in this process for
constituting an administrative instrument without being legally binding as foreseen in
Resolution 2.6, which was adopted during the Second Conference of the Parties (Geneva,
1988);
DECIDE to work together to improve the conservation status of the high Andean flamingos
(Phoenicopterus andinus and Phoenicopterus jamesi) and their habitats .
To this end, in a spirit of mutual understanding and cooperation, they will:
1. Provide effective protection for the populations of the above-mentioned high Andean
flamingos , and for the habitats upon which their survival depends.
2. Develop an Action Plan to protect the species and their habitats, which should guide
the conservation actions of the signatories and, which should inter alia include
measures to promote co-ordination of these actions, international cooperation,
improving the knowledge on these species, management, research, awareness and the
exchange of information among the signatories. The responsibility for the Action
Plan's elaboration will be assumed by the public services of each signatory country
with competence over the issue. Doing this, they can make use of the technical
assistance provided by the GCFA and other public and/or private authorities.
3. Designate in each country a scientific coordinator to serve as a focal point to
communicate with the other signatories and to guide the implementation of activities
under this Memorandum of Understanding and the Action Plan as well as
communicate the full contact details of this person (and any changes thereto) to the
Secretariat;
4. Assess the implementation of this Memorandum of Understanding and the Action
Plan at regular meetings of representatives of each of the signatories, and persons or
organisations technically qualified in the conservation of the species high Andean
flamingos. Such meetings shall be convened by the Secretariat, and hosted by and
organised in collaboration with one of the undersigned authorities or a co-operating
organisation; and
5. Provide the Secretariat with a regular report on their implementation of this
Memorandum of Understanding. The format and the frequency for this report will be
determined at the first meeting of the signatories. The Secretariat will make available
to the signatories the reports received, together with an overview report of progress
made to implement the Memorandum of Understanding and the Action Plan. This will
be compiled on the basis of all information available.
3
Basic Principles
6. This Memorandum of Understanding is an agreement under Article IV, paragraph 4,
of CMS. It is not an agreement under Article I, paragraph 1, of the CMS agreement,
but it should be considered as administrative measure, which will lead to the potential
conclusion of an agreement. This Memorandum of Understanding is not legally
binding and should not be considered as an international convention under the Vienna
Convention of 1969 on the law of international contracts.
7. During the first meeting of the parties which are signatories to this Memorandum of
Understanding, the signatories shall determine the period in which they will elaborate
the Action Plan as well as the date of its enforcement, from which on the public
services of each country, having competence of this matter, should begin with its
implementation.
8. This Memorandum of Understanding is open for signature by representatives of the
signing countries listed above. Giving their signature, they integrate the distribution
area of the species into the Memorandum. It will take effect with three signatures and
will enter into force when the signature of the third country has been obtained.
9. As soon as the third signature has been obtained, the Memorandum of Understanding
will enter into force for each state that adheres to the Memorandum upon its signature.
10. This Memorandum of Understanding will remain open for signature indefinitely, and
will remain in effect indefinitely subject to the right of any signatory to terminate its
participation by providing one year's written notice to all other signatories.
11. The Memorandum of Understanding, including the Action Plan, may be amended by a
consensus of the signatories.
12. The original text of this Memorandum of Understanding, in the Spanish and English
languages, shall be deposited with the CMS Secretariat, which will act as the
depositary. In the event of any discrepancies, the Spanish version will be considered
definitive. The working language for all matters related to this Memorandum of
Understanding will be Spanish and, for purposes of paragraph 5, English, depending
on the Spanish language capacity of the Secretariat.
13. The CMS Secretariat will act as the Secretariat to this Memorandum of
Understanding. It may use the services of any reliable organisation to support the
Memorandum's coordination.
14. The implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding and the Action Plan will
be subject to the availability of human and financial resources within the relevant
countries.
