Agreement
between the Government of the United States of America
and the Government of the Russian Federation
on Cooperation for the Purposes of Preventing, Deterring and Eliminating
Illegal, Unreported, and Unregulated Fishing
The Government of the United States of America and the Government ofthe
Russian Federation, hereinafter referred to as the Parties,
Noting the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of
December 10, 1982, and of the Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of December 10, 1982 Relating to
the Conservation and Management of Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish
Stocks ofDecember 4, 1995,
Recalling the Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries of October 31, 1995,
Mindful of their common interest in the conservation, rational management and
optimal utilization of living marine resources,
Guided by the provisions of the Agreement between the Government ofthe Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics and the Government ofthe United States of America on
Mutual Fisheries Relations of May 31, 1988,
Recalling the provisions of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the
United States of America on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters of June 17,
1999,
Guided by the principles outlined in the International Plan of Action to Prevent,
Deter, and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing of June 23, 2001,
Noting the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter and Eliminate
Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing ofNovember 22, 2009,
Expressing a desire to cooperate for the purposes of preventing, deterring and
eliminating illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (hereinafter, "IUU fishing"), as
well as illegal trade in living marine resources,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
1. For the purposes of this Agreement, the terms used herein shall have the
following meanings:
a) "illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing" refers to the activities set out in
paragraph 3 of the 2001 F AO International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter and
Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing;
b) "suspect vessel" means any vessel:
i. That is observed to have engaged in IUU fishing or fishing-related
activities in support of IUU fishing;
ii. That is stateless or has no actual connection with its flag state; or
iii. For which its flag state provides evidence that the fish or fish products
aboard the vessel were harvested or exported illegally.
c) "competent authorities" means:
with respect to the Russian Federation- the Federal Fisheries Agency, the Federal
Security Service, and the Federal Customs Service;
with respect to the United States of America- the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration and the U.S. Coast Guard;
d) "fish" means all species of living marine resources, whether processed or not;
e) "fishing" means searching for, attracting, locating, catching, taking or
harvesting fish or any activity which can reasonably be expected to result in the
attracting, locating, catching, taking or harvesting of fish;
f) "fishing-related activities" means any operations in support of, or in preparation
for, fishing, including the landing, packaging, processing, transshipping or transporting of
fish that have not been previously landed at a port, as well as the provisioning of
personnel, fuel, gear and other supplies at sea;
g) "port" means a place used to unload and transship living marine resources and
to obtain all types of equipment, defined in accordance with the legislation of each
Party's state;
h) "vessel" means any vessel, ship of another type or boat used for, equipped to
be used for, or intended to be used for, fishing or fishing-related activities.
2. In case of a change in the competent authorities or the designation of new
competent authorities, the Parties shall immediately inform each other thereof in writing
through diplomatic channels.
Article 2
The Parties shall cooperate for purposes of preventing, deterring and eliminating
IUU fishing in marine areas in which either Party exercises sovereign rights and
jurisdiction with respect to fishing in accordance with the norms of international law, as
well as in high seas areas that are subject to international fishing agreements to which
both Parties are party.
Article 3
In order to achieve the purposes of this Agreement, the Parties' competent
authorities shall:
1. Cooperate in preventing, deterring and eliminating IUU fishing and fishingrelated
activities, including the import into the territory of one Party's state of fish that
were harvested as a result of IUU fishing within waters under the jurisdiction of the other
Party.
2. Cooperate in identifying suspect vessels and exchanging information about
them, including through the compilation of a list of suspect vessels. The procedure for
compiling this list will be determined in the course of the consultations between the
Parties provided for by Article 4 of this Agreement.
3. Exchange information concerning:
(a) on the fifth day of every month:
i) the aggregate quantity and types of imported fish that originated from
the other Party's state;
ii) vessels of the Parties, as well as suspect vessels, that have unloaded fish
that originated in one Party's state in ports ofthe other Party's state, to include
information about each vessel, the names of the ports of unloading, the dates of calls. and
dates of unloading, and where available information about the species and quantities of
unloaded fish;
iii) vessels of the Parties, as well as suspect vessels, that were denied
entry into a port of either Party because it was established that they have engaged in or
they are suspected of having engaged in IUU fishing or in fishing-related activities in
support of IUU fishing, to include information about each vessel, the names of the ports
to which such vessels had requested entry, the dates on which such requests were
received, the dates on which entry was denied and, where available, information about
the species and quantities of fish that were planned to be unloaded;
iv) violations by individuals and/or legal entities of one Party of the
legislation of the other Party concerning fishing or fishing-related activities;
(b) within 10 days of the time of completion of inspections:
i) the results of any inspection of fishing-related activities that is
conducted by the competent authorities of one Party in its port on a vessel under the other
Party's flag or whose owner is an individual or legal entity of the other Party; and
ii) the results of any inspection of fishing-related activities that is
conducted by the competent authorities of one Party in its port on suspect vessels that
delivered fish that originated in the other Party's state;
(c) within the shortest possible time, with respect to the Parties' vessels, as well as
suspect vessels, that are requesting entry to a port of either Party to unload fish, to include
information about each vessel, the names of the ports to which such vessels are
requesting entry, the dates of receipt of such requests and, if available, information about
the origin of the fish aboard such vessels;
(d) requests made on the basis of Article 5 of this Agreement.
4. Within the framework of their legislation and international agreements to which
both Parties are party, cooperate to the fullest extent possible in the investigation and
adjudication of cases related to IUU fishing and fishing-related activities in support of
IUU fishing.
5. Take necessary measures, in accordance with the Parties' legislation, with
respect to fish that originate in one Party's state and that have been unloaded or are to be
unloaded in a port of the other Party's state in cases where there is evidence that such fish
were harvested as a result ofiUU fishing or fishing-related activities in support ofiUU
fishing provided by the Party where the fish originated.
6. Participate in working consultations and other types of joint activities
conducted by the Parties' competent authorities.
Article 4
1. The Parties' competent authorities, during the annual sessions of the RussiaU.
S. Intergovernmental Consultative Committee on Fisheries, shall hold consultations on
issues of cooperation in preventing, deterring and eliminating IUU fishing, as well as in
implementing this Agreement.
2. The consultations referred to in paragraph 1 of this Article shall be held
alternately in the territory of each Party's state not less often than once a year.
3. All decisions reached during the consultations shall be formalized as protocols.
4. Special consultations may be held on the initiative of one of the Parties.
Article 5
1. For purposes of exchanging information, one Party's competent authorities
shall forward requests to the other Party's competent authorities.
2. Requests to obtain information or to cooperate shall be forwarded in writing.
Such requests shall contain the following items:
a) the full name and job title ofthe official who is submitting the request;
b) the purpose of and grounds for the request, and a summary of the matter, as
well as other information needed for a substantive response;
c) if necessary, information concerning an investigation being conducted on a
lawful basis and with respect to which the request is being forwarded, including the
provisions .of law that are relevant to the suspected violations;
d) the requested actions;
e} if necessary, copies of documents pertaining to the matter.
3. In emergencies, the Parties' competent authorities may submit a request orally,
with subsequent written confirmation of the request as soon as possible.
4. In addition, the Parties' competent authorities shall:
a) preserve the confidentiality of information, as well as requests received on the
basis of this Agreement, in accordance with conditions specified by the Party providing
such information or request;
b) not use information obtained under this Agreement for purposes other than
those stipulated in its provisions;
c) not transfer to third parties any documents provided by the other Party without
that Party's written consent.
5. Should the competent authority of the Party that provided information under
this Agreement request that changes be made to the information or that the media
containing the relevant information be destroyed, the competent authority of the Party
that obtained such information in response to a written request shall promptly incorporate
the relevant changes in the information or destroy the media containing the information,
with subsequent written confirmation to the competent authority of the other Party that
these actions have been taken.
6. In the event of the termination of this Agreement, the Parties' competent
authorities shall take steps to reach agreement on the return, destruction, or continued use
and storage of information previously exchanged by them.
7. For purposes of the potential use of information:
a) the collection, disposition, preservation, destruction or alteration of documents
obtained on the basis of this Agreement shall be carried out in accordance with the
legislation of the Parties;
b) each Party shall inform the other Party of an unauthorized disclosure or use of
the information, providing the details of what occurred, and shall take all necessary
measures to prevent such an occurrence in the future;
c) each Party may decline to provide information to the other Party if it believes
that fulfilling a request will cause harm to the sovereignty, security and public order of its
state.
Article 6
The provisions of Article 17 of the Treaty between the Russian Federation and the
United States of America on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters of June 17,
1999, shall apply, mutatis mutandis, to the treatment of official documents related to the
investigation and adjudication of cases related to IUU fishing and fishing-related
activities, as well as to use of such documents as evidence and the return of such
documents;
Article 7
Disputes concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement shall be
settled by consultations between the Parties. Such consultations shall be held promptly
upon the request of either Party.
Article 8
Nothing in this Agreement shall be deemed to prejudice the rights and obligations
of each of the Parties under other international agreements, or the Parties' positions on
issues of the international law of the sea.
Article 9
This Agreement may be amended by mutual written consent of the Parties.
Article 10
1. This Agreement shall enter into force 30 days following the date of the receipt
of the last written notification through diplomatic channels of completion by the Parties
of their internal procedures necessary for its entry into force.
2. Each Party may terminate this Agreement by forwarding written notification to
that effect to the other Party through diplomatic channels. The Agreement shall terminate
six months after the other Party's receipt of such notification.
DONE at Portland, Oregon, in duplicate, on September 11, 2015, each in the Russian and
English languages, both texts being equally authentic.

