AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE GOVERNMENT OF THE UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA AND THE GOVERNMENT OF UKRAINE ON
COOPERATION IN THE FIELD OF ENVIRONMENT AL
PROTECTION
The Government of the United States of America and the Government of
Ukraine, hereinafter the "Parties,"
Attaching great significance to the problem of environmental protection and
to the prevention of the degradation of nature,
Recognizing the wholeness and integrity of the environment and the global
nature of many environmental problems,
Conscious of their responsibility for the environmental safety of their
nations,
Deeply convinced that environmental protection is an essential aspect of a
nation's development,
Noting that cooperation in the field of environmental protection is an important
and necessary element in strengthening bilateral relations for the benefit of
the peoples of both nations;
Have agreed as follows:
Article I
The Parties shall develop and carry out mutually beneficial and long-term
cooperative activities in the field of environmental protection and the efficient
use of natural resources.
Article II
The Parties, through their respective agencies, may enter into implementing
arrangements, as appropriate, for cooperation in the field of environmental
protection in the following areas:
a. Control of air, soil, and water pollution due to waste, toxic substances,
pesticides, or other contaminants;
b. Observation and monitoring of environmental quality;
c. Environmental emergencies;
d. Analysis of human health risks arising from environmental influences;
e. Radiation exposure and monitoring;
f. Economic, and administrative aspects of environmental protection
work;
g. EnvirQnmental education; and
h. Other areas as agreed by the Parties.
Article III
Cooperation of the Parties under such implementing arrangements may
include the following:
a. Joint projects and programs;
b. Exchange of information and documentation;
c. Organization of conferences, consultations, seminars, and meetings of
experts;
d. Training and instruction of personnel;
e. Exchange of experts, specialists, and trainees; and
f. Creation of a center for environmental education and information m
Kiev.
Article IV
The Parties shall encourage, wherever it is appropriate and feasible, the general
development of direct contacts and cooperation in the field of environmental
protection between state, civic and private organizations, institutions, companies,
foundations, and individual citizens of the two Parties.
Article V
This Agreement shall not affect the rights and obligations of either Party
under other agreements arising from previously concluded international agreements
in force between them.
Article VI
The Parties shall consult, at the request of either Party, on any matter within
the scope of this Agreement. If after such consultations, a dispute exists between
the Parties over the interpretation or implementation of this Agreement, the Parties
shall seek to resolve such dispute by negotiations between them.
Article VII
All activities under this Agreement shall be subject to the applicable laws
and regulations of the Parties. The obligations of the Parties under this Agreement
shall be subject to the availability of funds and personnel of each Party.
Article VIII
This Agreement shall enter into force upon signature and remain in force
for five years, after which it shall be automatically extended for successive five
year periods. This Agreement may be terminated by either Party on six months
written notice through diplomatic channels. Termination shall not affect the
validity or duration of activities commenced under this Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly authorized by their
respective Governments, have signed this Agreement.
DONE at Washington, in duplicate, this seventh day of May, 1992, in the
English and Ukrainian languages, each text being equally authentic.
FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED ST ATES OF AMERICA:
William K. Reilly
FOR THE GOVERNMENT
OF UKRAINE:
Yuriy Shcherbak
